<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XCV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="bruin-goodfellow" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Bruin Goodfellow</h2>
			<p>Once on a time there was a husbandman who travelled ever so far up to the Fells to fetch a load of leaves for litter for his cattle in winter. So when he got to where the litter lay he backed the sledge close up to the heap, and began to roll down the leaves on to the sledge. But under the heap lay a bear who had made his winter lair there, and when he felt the man trampling about he jumped out right down on to the sledge.</p>
			<p>As soon as the horse got wind of Bruin, he was afraid, and ran off as though he had stolen both bear and sledge, and he went back faster by many times than he had come up.</p>
			<p>Bruin, they say, is a brave fellow, but even he was not quite pleased with his drive this time. So there he sat, holding fast, as well as he could, and he glared and grinned on all sides, and he thought of throwing himself off, but he was not used to sledge travelling, and so he made up his mind to sit still where he was.</p>
			<p>So when he had driven a good bit, he met a pedlar.</p>
			<p>'Whither in heaven's name is the sheriff bound to-day? He has surely little time, and a long way; he drives so fast.'</p>
			<p>But Bruin said never a word, for all he could do was to stick fast.</p>
			<p>A little further on a beggar-woman met him. She nodded to him and greeted him, and begged for a penny, in God's name. But Bruin said never a word, but stuck fast and drove on faster than ever.</p>
			<p>So when he had gone a bit further, Reynard the fox met him.</p>
			<p>'Ho! ho!' said Reynard, 'are you out taking a drive. Stop a bit, and let me get up behind and be your post-boy.'</p>
			<p>But still Bruin said never a word, but held on like grim death, and drove on as fast as the horse could lay legs to the ground.</p>
			<p>'Well, well,' screamed Reynard, after him, 'if you won't take me with you I'll spae your fortune; and that is, though you drive like a dare-devil to-day, you'll be hanging up to-morrow with the hide off your back.'</p>
			<p>But Bruin never heard a word that Reynard said. On and on he drove just as fast; but when the horse got to the farm, he galloped into the open stable door at full speed, so that he tore off both sledge and harness, and as for poor Bruin, he knocked his skull against the lintel, and there he lay dead on the spot.</p>
			<p>All this time the man knew nothing of what had happened. He rolled down bundle after bundle of leaves, and when he thought he had enough to load his sledge, and went down to bind on the bundles, he could find neither horse nor sledge.</p>
			<p>So he had to tramp along the road to find his horse again, and, after a while, he met the pedlar.</p>
			<p>'Have you met my horse and sledge?' he asked.</p>
			<p>'No,' said the pedlar; 'but lower down along the road I met the sheriff; he drove so fast, he was surely going to lay some one by the heels.'</p>
			<p>A while after he met the beggar-woman.</p>
			<p>'Have you seen my horse and sledge?' said the man.</p>
			<p>'No,' said the beggar-woman, 'but I met the parson lower down yonder; he was surely going to a parish meeting, he drove so fast, and he had a borrowed horse.'</p>
			<p>A while after, the man met the fox.</p>
			<p>'Have you seen my horse and sledge?'</p>
			<p>'Yes! I have,' said the fox, 'and Bruin Goodfellow sat on it and drove just as though he had stolen both horse and harness.'</p>
			<p>'De'il take him,' said the man, 'I'll be bound he'll drive my horse to death.'</p>
			<p>'If he does, flay him,' said Reynard, 'and roast him before the fire! But if you get your horse again you may give me a lift over the Fell, for I can ride well, and besides, I have a fancy to see how it feels when one has four legs before one.'</p>
			<p>'What will you give for the lift?' said the man.</p>
			<p>'You can have what you like,' said Reynard; 'either wet or dry. You may be sure you'll always get more out of me than out of Bruin Goodfellow, for he is a rough carle to pay off when he takes a fancy to riding and hangs on a horse's back.'</p>
			<p>'Well! you shall have a lift over the Fell,' said the man, 'if you will only meet me at this spot to-morrow.'</p>
			<p>But he knew that Reynard was only playing off some of his tricks upon him, and so he took with him a loaded gun on the sledge, and when Reynard came, thinking to get a lift for nothing, he got, instead, a charge of shot in his body, and so the husbandman flayed the coat off him too, and then he had gotten both Bruin's hide and Reynard's skin.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
