<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XCIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-94" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>KARIN'S THREE STORIES.</h2>
			<p>"Now," said Karin, "as you have told <i>Peik</i>, which I did not want to tell, I'll tell you three stories all of a row, <i>Death and the Doctor</i>, <i>The Way of the World</i>, and <i>The Pancake</i>." So she began with the first.</p>
			<h4>DEATH AND THE DOCTOR.</h4>
			<p>'Once on a time there was a lad, who had lived as a servant a long time with a man of the North Country. This man was a master at ale-brewing; it was so out-of-the-way good the like of it was not to be found. So, when the lad was to leave his place and the man was to pay him the wages he had earned, he would take no other pay than a keg of yule-ale. Well! he got it and set off with it, and he carried it both far and long, but the longer he carried the keg the heavier it got, and so he began to look about to see if anyone were coming with whom he might have a drink, that the ale might lessen, and the keg lighten. And after a long, long time, he met an old man with a big beard.</p>
			<p>"'Good-day,' said the man.</p>
			<p>"'Good-day to you,' said the lad.</p>
			<p>"'Whither away?' asked the man.</p>
			<p>"'I'm looking after some one to drink with, and get my keg lightened,' said the lad.</p>
			<p>"'Can't you drink as well with me as with anyone else?' said the man. 'I have fared both far and wide, and I am both tired and thirsty.'</p>
			<p>"'Well! why shouldn't I?' said the lad; 'but tell me, whence do you come, and what sort of man are you?'</p>
			<p>"'I am "Our Lord," and come from Heaven,' said the man.</p>
			<p>"'Thee will I not drink with,' said the lad; 'for thou makest such distinction between persons here in the world, and sharest rights so unevenly that some get so rich and some so poor. No! with thee I will not drink,' and as he said this he trotted off with his keg again.</p>
			<p>"So, when he had gone a bit farther the keg grew too heavy again; he thought he never could carry it any longer unless some one came with whom he might drink, and so lessen the ale in the keg. Yes! he met an ugly scrawny man who came along fast and furious.</p>
			<p>"'Good-day,' said the man.</p>
			<p>"'Good-day to you,' said the lad.</p>
			<p>"'Whither away?' asked the man.</p>
			<p>"'Oh! I'm looking for some one to drink with, and get my keg lightened,' said the lad.</p>
			<p>"'Can't you drink with me as well as with any one else?' said the man; 'I have fared both far and wide, and I am tired and thirsty.'</p>
			<p>"'Well! why not?' said the lad; 'but who are you, and whence do you come?'</p>
			<p>"'Who am I? I am the De'il, and I come from Hell; that's where I come from,' said the man.</p>
			<p>"'No!' said the lad; 'thou only pinest and plaguest poor folk, and if there is any unhappiness a-stir, they always say it is thy fault. Thee I will not drink with.'</p>
			<p>"So he went far and farther than far again with his ale-keg on his back, till he thought it grew so heavy there was no carrying it any farther. He began to look round again if any one were coming with whom he could drink and lighten his keg. So after a long, long time, another man came, and he was so dry and lean 'twas a wonder his bones hung together.</p>
			<p>"'Good-day,' said the man.</p>
			<p>"'Good-day to you,' said the lad.</p>
			<p>"'Whither away?' asked the man.</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I was only looking about to see if I could find some one to drink with, that my keg might be lightened a little, it is so heavy to carry.'</p>
			<p>"'Can't you drink as well with me as with anyone else?' said the man.</p>
			<p>"'Yes; why not?' said the lad. 'But what sort of man are you?'</p>
			<p>"'They call me Death,' said the man.</p>
			<p>"'The very man for my money,' said the lad. 'Thee I am glad to drink with,' and as he said this he put down his keg, and began to tap the ale into a bowl. 'Thou art an honest, trustworthy man, for thou treatest all alike, both rich and poor.'</p>
			<p>"So he drank his health, and Death drank his health, and Death said he had never tasted such drink, and as the lad was fond of him, they drank bowl and bowl about, till the ale was lessened, and the keg grew light.</p>
			<p>"At last, Death said, 'I have never known drink which smacked better, or did me so much good as this ale that you have given me, and I scarce know what to give you in return.' But after he had thought a while, he said the keg should never get empty, however much they drank out of it, and the ale that was in it should become a healing drink, by which the lad could make the sick whole again better than any doctor. And he also said that when the lad came into the sick man's room Death would always be there, and show himself to him, and it should be to him for a sure token if he saw Death at the foot of the bed that he could cure the sick with a draught from the keg; but if he sate by the pillow, there was no healing nor medicine, for then the sick belonged to Death.</p>
			<p>"Well, the lad soon grew famous, and was called in far and near, and he helped many to health again, who had been given over. When he came in and saw how Death sate by the sick man's bed, he foretold either life or death, and his foretelling was never wrong. He got both a rich and powerful man, and at last he was called in to a king's daughter far, far away in the world. She was so dangerously ill no doctor thought he could do her any good, and so they promised him all that he cared either to ask or have if he would only save her life.</p>
			<p>"Now, when he came into the princess's room, there sate Death at her pillow; but as he sate he dozed and nodded, and while he did this she felt herself better.</p>
			<p>"'Now, life or death is at stake,' said the doctor; 'and I fear, from what I see, there is no hope.'</p>
			<p>"But they said he <i>must</i> save her, if it cost land and realm. So he looked at Death, and while he sate there and dozed again, he made a sign to the servants to turn the bed round so quickly that Death was left sitting at the foot, and at the very moment they turned the bed, the doctor gave her the draught, and her life was saved.</p>
			<p>"'Now you have cheated me,' said Death, 'and we are quits.'</p>
			<p>"'I was forced to do it,' said the doctor, 'unless I wished to lose land and realm.'</p>
			<p>"'That shan't help you much,' said Death; 'your time is up, for now you belong to me.'</p>
			<p>"'Well,' said the lad, 'what must be, must be; but you'll let me have time to read the Lord's Prayer first.'</p>
			<p>"Yes, he might have leave to do that; but he took very good care not to read the Lord's Prayer; everything else he read; but the Lord's Prayer never crossed his lips, and at last he thought he had cheated Death for good and all. But when Death thought he had really waited too long, he went to the lad's house one night, and hung up a great tablet with the Lord's Prayer painted on it over against his bed. So when the lad woke in the morning he began to read the tablet, and did not quite see what he was about till he came to <span class="smcap">Amen</span>; but then it was just too late, and Death had him."</p>
			<h4>THE WAY OF THE WORLD.</h4>
			<p>"Once on a time, there was a man who went into the wood to cut hop-poles, but he could find no trees so long and straight, and slender, as he wanted, till he came high up under a great heap of stones. There he heard groans and moans as though some one were at Death's door. So he went up to see who it was that needed help, and then he heard that the noise came from under a great flat stone which lay upon the heap. It was so heavy it would have taken many a man to lift it. But the man went down again into the wood and cut down a tree, which he turned into a lever, and with that he tilted up the stone, and lo! out from under it crawled a Dragon, and made at the man to swallow him up. But the man said he had saved the Dragon's life, and it was shameful thanklessness in him to want to eat him up.</p>
			<p>"'May be,' said the Dragon; 'but you might very well know I must be starved when I have been here hundreds of years and never tasted meat. Besides, it's the way of the world,—that's how it pays its debts.'</p>
			<p>"The man pleaded his cause stoutly, and begged prettily for his life; and at last they agreed to take the first living thing that came for a daysman, and if his doom went the other way the man should not lose his life, but if he said the same as the Dragon, the Dragon should eat the man.</p>
			<p>"The first thing that came was an old hound, who ran along the road down below under the hillside. Him they spoke to, and begged him to be judge.</p>
			<p>"'God knows,' said the hound, 'I have served my master truly ever since I was a little whelp. I have watched and watched many and many a night through, while he lay warm asleep on his ear, and I have saved house and home from fire and thieves more than once; but now I can neither see nor hear any more, and he wants to shoot me. And so I must run away, and slink from house to house, and beg for my living till I die of hunger. No! it's the way of the world,' said the hound; 'that's how it pays its debts.'</p>
			<p>"'Now I am coming to eat you up,' said the Dragon, and tried to swallow the man again. But the man begged and prayed hard for his life, till they agreed to take the next comer for a judge; and if he said the same as the Dragon and the Hound, the Dragon was to eat him, and get a meal of man's meat; but if he did not say so, the man was to get off with his life.</p>
			<p>"So there came an old horse limping down along the road which ran under the hill. Him they called out to come and settle the dispute. Yes; he was quite ready to do that.</p>
			<p>"'Now, I have served my master,' said the horse, 'as long as I could draw or carry. I have slaved and striven for him till the sweat trickled from every hair, and I have worked till I have grown lame, and halt, and worn out with toil and age; now I am fit for nothing. I am not worth my food, and so I am to have a bullet through me, he says. Nay! nay! It's the way of the world. That's how the world pays its debts.'</p>
			<p>"'Well, now I'm coming to eat you,' said the Dragon, who gaped wide, and wanted to swallow the man. But he begged again hard for his life.</p>
			<p>"But the Dragon said he must have a mouthful of man's meat; he was so hungry, he couldn't bear it any longer.</p>
			<p>"'See, yonder comes one who looks as if he was sent to be a judge between us,' said the man, as he pointed to Reynard the fox, who came stealing between the stones of the heap.</p>
			<p>"'All good things are three,' said the man; 'let me ask him, too, and if he gives doom like the others, eat me up on the spot.'</p>
			<p>"'Very well,' said the Dragon. He, too, had heard that all good things were three, and so it should be a bargain. So the man talked to the fox as he had talked to the others.</p>
			<p>"'Yes, yes,' said Reynard; 'I see how it all is;' but as he said this he took the man a little on one side.</p>
			<p>"'What will you give me if I free you from the Dragon?' he whispered into the man's ear.</p>
			<p>"'You shall be free to come to my house, and to be lord and master over my hens and geese, every Thursday night,' said the man.</p>
			<p>"'Well, my dear Dragon,' said Reynard, 'this is a very hard nut to crack. I can't get it into my head how you, who are so big and mighty a beast, could find room to lie under yon stone.'</p>
			<p>"'Can't you,' said the Dragon; 'well, I lay under the hillside, and sunned myself, and down came a landslip, and hurled the stone over me.'</p>
			<p>"'All very likely, I dare say,' said Reynard; 'but still I can't understand it, and what's more, I won't believe it till I see it.'</p>
			<p>"So the man said they had better prove it, and the Dragon crawled down into the hole again; but in the twinkling of an eye they whipped out the lever, and down the stone crashed again on the Dragon.</p>
			<p>"'Lie now there till Doomsday,' said the fox. 'You would eat the man, would you, who saved your life?'</p>
			<p>"The Dragon groaned, and moaned, and begged hard to come out; but the two went their way, and left him alone.</p>
			<p>"The very first Thursday night Reynard came to be lord and master over the hen-roost, and hid himself behind a great pile of wood hard by. When the maid went to feed the fowls, in stole Reynard. She neither saw nor heard anything of him; but her back was scarce turned before he had sucked blood enough for a week, and stuffed himself so that he couldn't stir. So when she came again in the morning, there Reynard lay and snored, and slept in the morning sun, with all four legs stretched straight; and he was as sleek and round as a German sausage.</p>
			<p>"Away ran the lassie for the goody, and she came, and all the lassies with her, with sticks and brooms to beat Reynard; and, to tell the truth, they nearly banged the life out of him; but, just as it was almost all over with him, and he thought his last hour was come, he found a hole in the floor, and so he crept out, and limped and hobbled off to the wood.</p>
			<p>"'Oh, oh,' said Reynard; 'how true it is. 'Tis the way of the world; and this is how it pays its debts.'"</p>
			<h4>THE PANCAKE.</h4>
			<p>"Once on a time there was a goody who had seven hungry bairns, and she was frying a pancake for them. It was a sweet-milk pancake, and there it lay in the pan bubbling and frizzling so thick and good, it was a sight for sore eyes to look at. And the bairns stood round about, and the goodman sat by and looked on.</p>
			<p>"'Oh, give me a bit of pancake, mother, dear; I am so hungry,' said one bairn.</p>
			<p>"'Oh, darling mother,' said the second.</p>
			<p>"'Oh, darling, good mother,' said the third.</p>
			<p>"'Oh, darling, good, nice mother,' said the fourth.</p>
			<p>"'Oh, darling, pretty, good, nice mother,' said the fifth.</p>
			<p>"'Oh, darling, pretty, good, nice, clever mother,' said the sixth.</p>
			<p>"'Oh, darling, pretty, good, nice, clever, sweet mother,' said the seventh.</p>
			<p>"So they begged for the pancake all round, the one more prettily than the other; for they were so hungry and so good.</p>
			<p>"'Yes, yes, bairns, only bide a bit till it turns itself,'—she ought to have said 'till I can get it turned,'—'and then you shall all have some—a lovely sweet-milk pancake; only look how fat and happy it lies there.'</p>
			<p>"When the pancake heard that, it got afraid, and in a trice it turned itself all of itself, and tried to jump out of the pan; but it fell back into it again t'other side up, and so when it had been fried a little on the other side too, till it got firmer in its flesh, it sprang out on the floor, and rolled off like a wheel through the door and down the hill.</p>
			<p>"'Holloa! Stop, pancake!' and away went the goody after it, with the frying-pan in one hand, and the ladle in the other, as fast as she could, and her bairns behind her, while the goodman limped after them last of all.</p>
			<p>"'Hi! won't you stop? Seize it. Stop, pancake, they all screamed out, one after the other, and tried to catch it on the run and hold it; but the pancake rolled on and on, and in the twinkling of an eye it was so far ahead that they couldn't see it, for the pancake was faster on its feet than any of them.</p>
			<p>"So when it had rolled awhile it met a man.</p>
			<p>"'Good-day, pancake,' said the man.</p>
			<p>"'God bless you, Manny Panny!' said the pancake.</p>
			<p>"'Dear pancake,' said the man, 'don't roll so fast; stop a little and let me eat you.'</p>
			<p>"'When I have given the slip to Goody Poody, and the goodman, and seven squalling children, I may well slip through your fingers, Manny Panny,' said the pancake, and rolled on and on till it met a hen.</p>
			<p>"'Good-day, pancake,' said the hen.</p>
			<p>"'The same to you, Henny Penny,' said the pancake.</p>
			<p>"'Pancake, dear, don't roll so fast, bide a bit and let me eat you up,' said the hen.</p>
			<p>"'When I have given the slip to Goody Poody, and the goodman, and seven squalling children, and Manny Panny, I may well slip through your claws, Henny Penny,' said the pancake, and so it rolled on like a wheel down the road.</p>
			<p>"Just then it met a cock.</p>
			<p>"'Good-day, pancake,' said the cock.</p>
			<p>"'The same to you, Cocky Locky,' said the pancake.</p>
			<p>"'Pancake, dear, don't roll so fast, but bide a bit and let me eat you up.'</p>
			<p>"'When I have given the slip to Goody Poody, and the goodman, and seven squalling children, and to Manny Panny, and Henny Penny, I may well slip through your claws, Cocky Locky,' said the pancake, and off it set rolling away as fast as it could; and when it had rolled a long way it met a duck.</p>
			<p>"'Good-day, pancake,' said the duck.</p>
			<p>"'The same to you, Ducky Lucky.'</p>
			<p>"'Pancake, dear, don't roll away so fast; bide a bit and let me eat you up.'</p>
			<p>"'When I have given the slip to Goody Poody, and the goodman, and seven squalling children, and Manny Panny, and Henny Penny, and Cocky Locky, I may well slip through your fingers, Ducky Lucky,' said the pancake, and with that it took to rolling and rolling faster than ever; and when it had rolled a long, long while, it met a goose.</p>
			<p>"'Good-day, pancake,' said the goose.</p>
			<p>"'The same to you, Goosey Poosey.'</p>
			<p>"'Pancake, dear, don't roll so fast; bide a bit and let me eat you up.'</p>
			<p>"'When I have given the slip to Goody Poody, and the goodman, and seven squalling children, and Manny Panny, and Henny Penny, and Cocky Locky, and Ducky Lucky, I can well slip through your feet, Goosey Poosey,' said the pancake, and off it rolled.</p>
			<p>"So when it had rolled a long, long way farther, it met a gander.</p>
			<p>"'Good-day, pancake,' said the gander.</p>
			<p>"'The same to you, Gander Pander,' said the pancake.</p>
			<p>"'Pancake, dear, don't roll so fast: bide a bit and let me eat you up.'</p>
			<p>"'When I have given the slip to Goody Poody, and the goodman, and seven squalling children, and Manny Panny, and Henny Penny, and Cocky Locky, and Ducky Lucky, and Goosey Poosey, I may well slip through your feet, Gander Pander,' said the pancake, which rolled off as fast as ever.</p>
			<p>"So when it had rolled a long, long time, it met a pig.</p>
			<p>"'Good-day, pancake,' said the pig.</p>
			<p>"'The same to you, Piggy Wiggy,' said the pancake, which, without a word more, began to roll and roll like mad.</p>
			<p>"'Nay, nay,' said the pig, 'you needn't be in such a hurry; we two can then go side by side and see one another over the wood; they say it is not too safe in there.'</p>
			<p>"The pancake thought there might be something in that, and so they kept company. But when they had gone awhile, they came to a brook. As for piggy, he was so fat he swam safe across, it was nothing to him; but the poor pancake couldn't get over.</p>
			<p>"'Seat yourself on my snout,' said the pig, 'and I'll carry you over.'</p>
			<p>"So the pancake did that.</p>
			<p>"'Ouf, ouf,' said the pig, and swallowed the pancake at one gulp; and then, as the poor pancake could go no farther, why—this story can go no farther either."</p>
			<hr/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
