<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Norse Popular Tales</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="introduction" id="norse-popular-tales" epub:type="introduction">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Norse Popular Tales</h4>
			<p>The preceding observations will have given a sufficient account of the mythology of the Norsemen, and of the way in which it fell. They came from the East, and brought that common stock of tradition with them. Settled in the Scandinavian peninsula, they developed themselves through Heathenism, Romanism, and Lutheranism, in a locality little exposed to foreign influence, so that even now the Daleman in Norway or Sweden may be reckoned among the most primitive examples left of peasant life. We should expect, then, that these <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Popular Tales</i>, which, for the sake of those ignorant in such matters, it may be remarked, had never been collected or reduced to writing till within the last few years, would present a faithful picture of the national consciousness, or, perhaps, to speak more correctly, of that half consciousness out of which the heart of any people speaks in its abundance. Besides those world-old affinities and primaeval parallelisms, besides those dreamy recollections of its old home in the East, which we have already pointed out, we should expect to find its later history, after the great migration, still more distinctly reflected; to discover heathen gods masked in the garb of Christian saints; and thus to see a proof of our assertion above, that a nation more easily changes the form than the essence of its faith, and clings with a toughness which endures for centuries to what it has once learned to believe.</p>
			<p>In all mythologies, the trait of all others which most commonly occurs, is that of the descent of the Gods to earth, where, in human form, they mix among mortals, and occupy themselves with their affairs, either out of a spirit of adventure, or to try the hearts of men. Such a conception is shocking to the Christian notion of the omnipotence and omnipresence of God, but we question if there be not times when the most pious and perfect Christian may not find comfort and relief from a fallacy which was a matter of faith in less enlightened creeds, and over which the apostle, writing to the Hebrews, throws the sanction of his authority, so far as angels are concerned.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a> Nor could he have forgotten those words of the men of Lystra, “The Gods are come down to us in the likeness of men”; and how they called “Barnabas Jupiter,” and himself Mercury, “because he was the chief speaker.” Classical mythology is full of such stories. These wanderings of the Gods are mentioned in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Odyssey</i>, and the sanctity of the rites of hospitality, and the dread of turning a stranger from the door, took its origin from a fear lest the wayfaring man should be a Divinity in disguise. According to the Greek story, Orion owed his birth to the fact that the childless Hyrieus, his reputed father, had once received unawares Zeus, Poseidon, and Hermes, or, to call them by their Latin names, Jupiter, Neptune, and Mercury. In the beautiful story of Philemon and Baucis, Jupiter and Mercury reward the aged couple who had so hospitably received them by warning them of the approaching deluge. The fables of Phaedrus and Aesop represent Mercury and Demeter as wandering and enjoying the hospitality of men. In India it is Brahma and Vishnu who generally wander. In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i>, Odin, Loki, and Hoenir thus roam about, or Thor, Thialfi, and Loki. Sometimes Odin appears alone as a horseman, who turns in at night to the smith’s house, and gets him to shoe his horse, a legend which reminds us at once of “The Master-Smith.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a> Sometimes it is Thor with his great hammer who wanders thus alone.</p>
			<p>Now, let us turn from heathen to Christian times, and look at some of these old legends of wandering gods in a new dress. Throughout the Middle Age, it is our blessed Lord and <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter that thus wander, and here we see that half-digested heathendom to which we have alluded. Those who may be shocked at such tales in this collection as “The Master-Smith” and “Gertrude’s Bird,” must just remember that these are almost purely heathen traditions, in which the names alone are Christian; and if it be any consolation to any to know the fact, we may as well state at once that this adaptation of new names to old beliefs is not peculiar to the Norsemen, but is found in all the popular tales of Europe. Germany was full of them, and there <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter often appears in a snappish ludicrous guise, which reminds the reader versed in Norse mythology of the tricks and pranks of the shifty Loki. In the Norse tales he thoroughly preserves his saintly character.</p>
			<p>Nor was it only gods that walked among men. In the Norse mythology, Frigga, Odin’s wife, who knew beforehand all that was to happen, and Freyja, the goddess of love and plenty, were prominent figures, and often trod the earth; the three Norns or Fates, who sway the wierds of men, and spin their destinies at Mimirs’ well of knowledge, were awful venerable powers, to whom the heathen world looked up with love and adoration and awe. To that love and adoration and awe, throughout the middle age, one woman, transfigured into a divine shape, succeeded by a sort of natural right, and round the Virgin Mary’s blessed head a halo of lovely tales of divine help, beams with soft radiance as a crown bequeathed to her by the ancient goddesses. She appears as divine mother, spinner, and helpful virgin (<i xml:lang="fr">vierge sécourable</i>). Flowers and plants bear her name. In England one of our commonest and prettiest insects is still called after her, but which belonged to Freyja, the heathen “Lady,” long before the western nations had learned to adore the name of the mother of Jesus.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a></p>
			<p>The reader of these <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tales</i> will meet, in that of “The Lassie and her Godmother,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>, with the Virgin Mary in a truly mythic character, as the majestic guardian of sun, moon and stars, combined with that of a helpful, kindly woman, who, while she knows how to punish a fault, knows also how to reconcile and forgive.</p>
			<p>The Norseman’s god was a god of battles, and victory his greatest gift to men; but this was not the only aspect under which the Great Father was revered. Not victory in the fight alone, but every other good gift came down from him and the Aesir. Odin’s supreme will was that treasure-house of bounty towards which, in one shape or the other, all mortal desires turned, and out of its abundance showers of mercy and streams of divine favour constantly poured down to refresh the weary race of men. All these blessings and mercies, nay, their very source itself, the ancient language bound up in a single word, which, however expressive it may still be, has lost much of the fullness of its meaning in its descent to these later times. This word was “Wish,” which originally meant the perfect ideal, the actual fruition of all joy and desire, and not, as now, the empty longing for the object of our desires. From this original abstract meaning, it was but a step to pass to the concrete, to personify the idea, to make it an immortal essence, an attribute of the divinity, another name for the greatest of all Gods himself. And so we find a host of passages in early writers,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a> in every one of which “God” or “Odin” might be substituted for “Wish” with perfect propriety. Here we read how “The Wish” has hands, feet, power, sight, toil, and art. How he works and labours, shapes and masters, inclines his ear, thinks, swears, curses, and rejoices, adopts children, and takes men into his house; behaves, in short, as a being of boundless power and infinite free will. Still more, he rejoices in his own works as in a child, and thus appears in a thoroughly patriarchal point of view, as the Lord of creation, glorying in his handiwork, as the father of a family in early times was glad at heart when he reckoned his children as arrows in his quiver, and beheld his house full of a long line of retainers and dependants. For this attribute of the Great Father, for Odin as the God of Wish, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i> uses the word “Oski” which literally expresses the masculine personification of “Wish,” and it passed on and added the word <i xml:lang="non">osk</i>, wish, as a prefix to a number of others, to signify that they stood in a peculiar relation to the great giver of all good. Thus we have <i xml:lang="non">oska-steinn</i>, wishing-stone, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> a stone which plays the part of a divining rod, and reveals secrets and hidden treasure; <i xml:lang="non">oska-byrr</i>, a fair wind, a wind as fair as man’s heart could wish it; <i xml:lang="non">osk-barn</i> and <i xml:lang="non">oska-barn</i>, a child after one’s own heart, an adopted child, as when the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Younger Edda</i> tells us that all those who die in battle are Odin’s <i xml:lang="non">choice-bairns</i>, his adopted children, those on whom he has set his heart, an expression which, in their turn, was taken by the Icelandic Christian writers to express the relation existing between God and the baptized; and, though last, not least, <i xml:lang="non">oska-maer</i>, wish-maidens, another name for the Valkyries⁠—Odin’s corse-choosers⁠—who picked out the dead for him on the field of battle, and waited on the heroes in Valhalla. Again, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i> is filled with “choice things,” possessing some mysterious power of their own, some “virtue,” as our older English would express it, which belong to this or that god, and are occasionally lent or lost. Thus, Odin himself had a spear which gave victory to those on whose side it was hurled; Thor, a hammer which destroyed the Giants, hallowed vows, and returned of itself to his hand. He had a strength-belt, too, which, when he girded it on, his god-strength waxed one-half; Freyr had a sword which wielded itself; Freyja a necklace which, like the cestus of Venus, inspired all hearts with love; Freyr, again, had a ship called <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Skithblathnir</i>.</p>
			<p>She is so great, that all the Aesir, with their weapons and war gear, may find room on board her; and as soon as the sail is set, she has a fair wind whither she shall go; and when there is no need of faring on the sea in her, she is made of so many things, and with so much craft, that Freyr may fold her together like a cloth, and keep her in his bag.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a></p>
			<p>Of this kind, too, was the ring “Dropper” which Odin had, and from which twelve other rings dropped every night; the apples which Idun, one of the goddesses, had, and of which, so soon as the Aesir ate, they became young again; the helm which Oegir, the sea giant had, which struck terror into all antagonists like the Aegis of Athene; and that wonderful mill which the mythical Frodi owned, of which we shall shortly speak.</p>
			<p>Now, let us see what traces of this great god “Wish” and his choice-bairns and wishing-things we can find in these <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tales</i>, faint echoes of a mighty heathen voice, which once proclaimed the goodness of the great Father in the blessings which he bestowed on his chosen sons. We shall not have long to seek. In tale<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>, when Shortshanks meets those three old crookbacked hags who have only one eye, which he snaps up, and gets first a sword “that puts a whole army to flight, be it ever so great,” we have the “one-eyed Odin,” degenerated into an old hag, or rather⁠—by no uncommon process⁠—we have an old witch fused by popular tradition into a mixture of Odin and the three Nornir. Again, when he gets that wondrous ship “which can sail over fresh water and salt water, and over high hills and deep dales,” and which is so small that he can put it into his pocket, and yet, when he came to use it, could hold five hundred men, we have plainly the Skithblathnir of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i> to the very life. So also in “The Best Wish,” <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>, the whole groundwork of this story rests on this old belief; and when we meet that pair of old scissors which cuts all manner of fine clothes out of the air, that tablecloth which covers itself with the best dishes you could think of, as soon as it was spread out, and that tap which, as soon as it was turned, poured out the best of mead and wine, we have plainly another form of Frodi’s wishing-quern⁠—another recollection of those things of choice about which the old mythology has so much to tell. Of the same kind are the tablecloth, the ram, and the stick in “The Lad Who Went to the North Wind,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>, and the rings in “The Three Princesses of Whiteland,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>, and in “Soria Moria Castle,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lvi</span>. In the first of those stories, too, we find those “three brothers” who have stood on a moor “these hundred years fighting about a hat, a cloak, and a pair of boots,” which had the virtue of making him who wore them invisible; choice things which will again remind the reader of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Nibelungen Lied</i>, of the way in which Siegfried became possessed of the famous hoard of gold, and how he got that “cap of darkness” which was so useful to him in his remaining exploits. So again in “The Blue Belt,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span>, what is that belt which, when the boy girded it on, “he felt as strong as if he could lift the whole hill,” but Thor’s “choice-belt”; and what is the daring boy himself, who overcomes the Troll, but Thor himself, as engaged in one of his adventures with the Giants? So, too, in “Little Annie the Goose-Girl,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lix</span>, the stone which tells the Prince all the secrets of his brides is plainly the old <i xml:lang="non">Oskastein</i>, or “wishing-stone.” These instances will suffice to show the prolonged faith in “Wish,” and his choice things; a belief which, though so deeply rooted in the North, we have already traced to its home in the East, whence it stretches itself from pole to pole, and reappears in every race. We recognize it in the wishing-cap of Fortunatus, which is a Celtic legend; in the cornucopia of the Romans; in the goat Amalthea among the Greeks; in the wishing-cow and wishing-tree of the Hindus; in the pumpkin-tree of the West Indian Ananzi stories; in the cow of the Serbian legends, who spins yarn out of her ear; in the Sampo of the Finns; and in all those stories of cups, and glasses, and horns, and rings, and swords, seized by some bold spirit in the midst of a fairy revel, or earned by some kind deed rendered by mortal hand to one of the “good folk” in her hour of need, and with which the <em>luck</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a> of that mortal’s house was ever afterwards bound up; stories with which the local traditions of all lands are full, but which all pay unconscious homage to the worship of that great God, to whom so many heathen hearts so often turned as the divine realizer of their prayers, and the giver of all good things, until they come at last to make an idol out of their hopes and prayers, and to immortalize the very “Wish” itself.</p>
			<p>Again, of all beliefs, that in which man has, at all times of his history, been most prone to set faith, is that of a golden age of peace and plenty, which had passed away, but which might be expected to return. Such a period was looked for when Augustus closed the temple of Janus, and peace, though perhaps not plenty, reigned over what the proud Roman called the habitable world. Such a period the early Christian expected when the Saviour was born, in the reign of that very Augustus; and such a period some, whose thoughts are more set on earth than heaven, have hoped forever since, with a hope which, though deferred for eighteen centuries, has not made their hearts sick. Such a period of peace and plenty, such a golden time, the Norseman could tell of in his mythic Frodi’s reign, when gold or <em>Frodi’s meal</em>, as it was called, was so plentiful that golden armlets lay untouched from year’s end to year’s end on the king’s highway, and the fields bore crops unsown. Here, in England, the Anglo-Saxon Bede<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a> knew how to tell the same story of Edwin, the Northumbrian King, and when Alfred came to be mythic, the same legend was passed on from Edwin to the West Saxon monarch. The remembrance of “the bountiful Frodi” echoed in the songs of German poets long after the story which made him so bountiful had been forgotten; but the Norse Skalds could tell not only the story of Frodi’s wealth and bounty, but also of his downfall and ruin. In Frodi’s house were two maidens of that old giant race, Fenja and Menja. These daughters of the giant he had bought as slaves, and he made them grind his quern or hand-mill, Grotti, out of which he used to grind peace and gold. Even in that golden age one sees there were slaves, and Frodi, however bountiful to his thanes and people, was a hard taskmaster to his giant handmaidens. He kept them to the mill, nor gave them longer rest than the cuckoo’s note lasted, or they could sing a song. But that quern was such that it ground anything that the grinder chose, though until then it had ground nothing but gold and peace. So the maidens ground and ground, and one sang their piteous tale in a strain worthy of Aeschylus as the other worked⁠—they prayed for rest and pity, but Frodi was deaf. Then they turned in giant mood, and ground no longer peace and plenty, but fire and war. Then the quern went fast and furious, and that very night came Mysing the Sea-rover, and slew Frodi and all his men, and carried off the quern; and so Frodi’s peace ended. The maidens the sea-rover took with him, and when he got on the high seas he bade them grind salt. So they ground; and at midnight they asked if he had not salt enough, but he bade them still grind on. So they ground till the ship was full and sank, Mysing, maids, and mill, and all, and that’s why the sea is salt.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a> Perhaps of all the tales in this volume, none could be selected as better proving the toughness of a traditional belief than <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, which tells “Why the Sea is Salt.”</p>
			<p>The notion of the Arch-enemy of God and man, of a fallen angel, to whom power was permitted at certain times for an all-wise purpose by the Great Ruler of the universe, was as foreign to the heathendom of our ancestors as his name was outlandish and strange to their tongue. This notion Christianity brought with it from the East; and though it is a plant which has struck deep roots, grown distorted and awry, and borne a bitter crop of superstition, it required all the authority of the Church to prepare the soil at first for its reception. To the notion of good necessarily follows that of evil. The Eastern mind, with its Ormuzd and Ahriman, is full of such dualism, and from that hour, when a more than mortal eye saw Satan falling like lightning from heaven,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a> the kingdom of darkness, the abode of Satan and his bad spirits, was established in direct opposition to the kingdom of the Saviour and his angels. The North had its own notion on this point. Its mythology was not without its own dark powers; but though they too were ejected and dispossessed, they, according to that mythology, had rights of their own. To them belonged all the universe that had not been seized and reclaimed by the younger race of Odin and Aesir; and though this upstart dynasty, as the Frost Giants in Promethean phrase would have called it, well knew that Hel, one of this giant progeny, was fated to do them all mischief, and to outlive them, they took her and made her queen of Niflheim, and mistress over nine worlds. There, in a bitterly cold place, she received the souls of all who died of sickness or old age; care was her bed, hunger her dish, starvation her knife. Her walls were high and strong, and her bolts and bars huge; “Half blue was her skin, and half the colour of human flesh. A goddess easy to know, and in all things very stern and grim.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a> But though severe, she was not an evil spirit. She only received those who died as no Norseman wished to die. For those who fell on the gory battlefield, or sank beneath the waves, Valhalla was prepared, and endless mirth and bliss with Odin. Those went to Hel, who were rather unfortunate than wicked, who died before they could be killed. But when Christianity came in and ejected Odin and his crew of false divinities, declaring them to be lying gods and demons, then Hel fell with the rest; but fulfilling her fate, outlived them. From a person she became a place, and all the Northern nations, from the Goth to the Norseman, agreed in believing Hell to be the abode of the devil and his wicked spirits, the place prepared from the beginning for the everlasting torments of the damned. One curious fact connected with this explanation of Hell’s origin will not escape the reader’s attention. The Christian notion of Hell is that of a place of heat, for in the East, whence Christianity came, heat is often an intolerable torment, and cold, on the other hand, everything that is pleasant and delightful. But to the dweller in the North, heat brings with it sensations of joy and comfort, and life without fire has a dreary outlook; so their Hel ruled in a cold region over those who were cowards by implication, while the mead-cup went round, and huge logs blazed and crackled in Valhalla, for the brave and beautiful who had dared to die on the field of battle. But under Christianity the extremes of heat and cold have met, and Hel, the cold uncomfortable goddess, is now our Hell, where flames and fire abound, and where the devils abide in everlasting flame.</p>
			<p>Still, popular tradition is tough, and even after centuries of Christian teaching, the Norse peasant, in his popular tales, can still tell of Hell as a place where firewood is wanted at Christmas, and over which a certain air of comfort breathes, though, as in the goddess Hel’s halls, meat is scarce. The following passage from “Why the Sea is Salt,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, will sufficiently prove this:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“Well, here is the flitch,” said the rich brother, “and now go straight to Hell.”</p>
				<p>“What I have given my word to do, I must stick to” said the other; so he took the flitch and set off. He walked the whole day, and at dusk he came to a place where he saw a very bright light.</p>
				<p>“Maybe this is the place” said the man to himself. So he turned aside, and the first thing he saw was an old, old man, with a long white beard, who stood in an outhouse, hewing wood for the Christmas fire.</p>
				<p>“Good even,” said the man with the flitch.</p>
				<p>“The same to you; whither are you going so late?” said the man.</p>
				<p>“Oh! I’m going to Hell, if I only knew the right way,” answered the poor man.</p>
				<p>“Well, you’re not far wrong, for this is Hell,” said the old man; “When you get inside they will be all for buying your flitch, for meat is scarce in Hell; but mind you don’t sell it unless you get the hand-quern which stands behind the door for it. When you come out, I’ll teach you how to handle the quern, for it’s good to grind almost anything.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>This, too, is the proper place to explain the conclusion of that intensely heathen tale, “The Master-Smith,” <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. We have already seen how the Saviour and <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter supply, in its beginning, the place of Odin and some other heathen god. But when the Smith sets out with the feeling that he has done a silly thing in quarrelling with the Devil, having already lost his hope of heaven, this tale assumes a still more heathen shape. According to the old notion, those who were not Odin’s guests went either to Thor’s house, who had all the thralls, or to Freyja, who even claimed a third part of the slain on every battlefield with Odin, or to Hel, the cold comfortless goddess already mentioned, who was still no tormentor, though she ruled over nine worlds, and though her walls were high, and her bolts and bars huge; traits which come out in “The Master-Smith,” <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>, when the Devil, who here assumes Hel’s place, orders the watch to go back and lock up <em>all the nine locks on the gates of Hell</em>⁠—a lock for each of the goddesses <em>nine</em> worlds⁠—and to put a padlock on besides. In the twilight between heathendom and Christianity, in that half Christian half heathen consciousness, which this tale reveals, heaven is the preferable abode, as Valhalla was of yore, but rather than be without a house to one’s head after death, Hell was not to be despised; though, having behaved ill to the ruler of one, and actually quarrelled with the master of the other, the Smith was naturally anxious on the matter. This notion of different abodes in another world, not necessarily places of torment, comes out too in “Not a Pin to Choose Between Them,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span>, where Peter, the second husband of the silly Goody, goes about begging from house to house in Paradise.</p>
			<p>For the rest, whenever the Devil appears in these tales, it is not at all as the Arch-enemy, as the subtle spirit of the Christian’s faith, but rather as one of the old Giants, supernatural and hostile indeed to man, but simple and easily deceived by a cunning reprobate, whose superior intelligence he learns to dread, for whom he feels himself no match, and whom, finally, he will receive in Hell at no price. We shall have to notice some other characteristics of this race of giants a little further on, but certainly no greater proof can be given of the small hold which the Christian Devil has taken of the Norse mind, than the heathen aspect under which he constantly appears, and the ludicrous way in which he is always outwitted.</p>
			<p>We have seen how our Lord and the saints succeeded to Odin and his children in the stories which told of their wanderings on earth, to warn the wicked, or to help the good; we have seen how the kindliness and helpfulness of the ancient goddesses fell like a royal mantle round the form of the Virgin Mary. We have seen, too, on the other hand, how the procession of the Almighty God degenerated into the infernal midnight hunt. We have now to see what became of the rest of the power of the goddesses, of all that might which was not absorbed into the glory of the blessed Virgin. We shall not have far to seek. No reader of early medieval chronicles and sermons, can fail to have been struck with many passages which ascribe majesty and power to beings of woman’s sex. Now it is a heathen goddess as <em>Diana</em>; now some half-historical character as <em>Bertha</em>; now a mythical being as <em>Holda</em>; now <em>Herodias</em>; now <em>Satia</em>; now <em>Domina Abundia</em>, or <em>Dame Habonde</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a></p>
			<p>A very short investigation will serve to identify the two ancient goddesses Frigga and Freyja with all these leaders of a midnight host. Just as Odin was banished from day to darkness, so the two great heathen goddesses, fused into one “uncanny” shape, were supposed to ride the air at night. Medieval chroniclers, writing in bastard Latin, and following the example of classical authors, when they had to find a name for this demon-goddess, chose, of course, <em>Diana</em> the heathen huntress, the moon-goddess, and the ruler of the night. In the same way, when they threw Odin’s name into a Latin shape, he, the god of wit and will, as well as power and victory, became Mercury. As for Herodias⁠—not the mother, but the daughter who danced⁠—she must have made a deep impression on the mind of the early Middle Age, for she was supposed to have been cursed after the beheading of John the Baptist, and to have gone on dancing forever. When heathendom fell, she became confounded with the ancient Goddesses, and thus we find her, sometimes among the crew of the Wild Huntsman, sometimes, as we see in the passages below, in company with, or in the place of <em>Diana</em>, <em>Holda</em>, <em>Satia</em>, and <em>Abundia</em>, at the head of a bevy of women, who met at certain places to celebrate unholy rites and mysteries. As for <em>Holda</em>, <em>Satia</em>, and <em>Abundia</em>, “the kind,” “the satisfying,” and “the abundant,” they are plainly names of good rather than evil powers; they are ancient epithets drawn from the bounty of the “Good Lady,” and attest the feeling of respect which still clung to them in the popular mind. As was the case whenever Christianity was brought in, the country folk, always averse to change, as compared with the more lively and intelligent dwellers in towns, still remained more or less heathen,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a> and to this day they preserve unconsciously many superstitions which can be traced up in lineal descent to their old belief. In many ways does the old divinity peep out under the new superstition⁠—the long train, the midnight feast, “the good lady” who presides, the bounty and abundance which her votaries fancied would follow in her footsteps, all belong to the ancient Goddess. Most curious of all is the way in which all these traditions from different countries insist on the third part of the earth, the third child born, the third soul as belonging to the “good lady,” who leads the revel; for this right of a third, or even of a half, was one which Freyja possessed. “But Freyja is most famous of the Asynjor. She has that bower in heaven hight Fólkvángr, and whithersoever she rideth to the battle, there hath she one half of the slain; but Odin the other half.” Again “when she fares abroad, she drives two cats and sits in a car, and she lends an easy ear to the prayers of men.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a></p>
			<p>We have got then the ancient goddesses identified as evil influences, and as the leader of a midnight band of women, who practised secret and unholy rites. This leads us at once to witchcraft. In all ages and in all races this belief in sorcery has existed. Men and women practised it alike, but in all times female sorcerers have predominated.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a> This was natural enough. In those days women were priestesses; they collected drugs and simples; women alone knew the virtues of plants. Those soft hands spun linen, made lint, and bound wounds. Women in the earliest times with which we are acquainted with our forefathers, alone knew how to read and write, they only could carve the mystic runes, they only could chant the charms so potent to allay the wounded warrior’s smart and pain. The men were busy out of doors with ploughing, hunting, barter, and war. In such an age the sex which possessed by natural right book-learning, physic, soothsaying, and incantation, even when they used these mysteries for good purposes, were but a step from sin. The same soft white hand that bound the wound and scraped the lint; the same gentle voice that sung the mystic rune, that helped the childbearing woman, or drew the arrowhead from the dying champion’s breast; the same bright eye that gazed up to heaven in ecstacy through the sacred grove and read the will of the Gods when the mystic tablets and rune-carved lots were cast⁠—all these, if the will were bad, if the soothsayer passed into the false prophetess, the leech into a poisoner, and the priestess into a witch, were as potent and terrible for ill as they had once been powerful for good. In all the Indo-European tribes, therefore, women, and especially old women, have practised witchcraft from the earliest times, and Christianity found them wherever it advanced. But Christianity, as it placed mankind upon a higher platform of civilization, increased the evil which it found, and when it expelled the ancient goddesses, and confounded them as demons with Diana and Herodias, it added them and their votaries to the old class of malevolent sorcerers. There was but one step, but a simple act of the will, between the Norn and the hag, even before Christianity came in. As soon as it came, down went Goddess, Valkyrie, Norn, priestess, and soothsayer, into that unholy deep where the heathen hags and witches had their being; and, as Christianity gathered strength, developed its dogmas, and worked out its faith; fancy, tradition, leechcraft, poverty, and idleness, produced that unhappy class, the medieval witch, the persecution of which is one of the darkest pages in religious history.</p>
			<p>It is curious indeed to trace the belief in witches through the Middle Age, and to mark how it increases in intensity and absurdity. At first, as we have seen in the passages quoted, the superstition seemed comparatively harmless, and though the witches themselves may have believed in their unholy power, there were not wanting divines who took a commonsense view of the matter, and put the absurdity of their pretensions to a practical proof. Such was that good parish priest who asked, when an old woman of his flock insisted that she had been in his house with the company of “the Good Lady,” and had seen him naked and covered him up, “How, then, did you get in when all the doors were locked?” “We can get in,” she said, “even if the doors are locked.” Then the priest took her into the chancel of the church, locked the door, and gave her a sound thrashing with the pastoral staff, calling out “Out with you, lady witch.” But as she could not, he sent her home, saying “See now how foolish you are to believe in such empty dreams.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a> But as the Church increased in strength, as heresies arose, and consequent persecution, then the secret meetings of these sectarians, as we should now call them, were identified by the hierarchy with the rites of sorcery and magic, and with the relics of the worship of the old gods. By the time, too, that the hierarchy was established, that belief in the fallen angel, the Arch-Fiend, the Devil, originally so foreign to the nations of the West, had become thoroughly ingrafted on the popular mind, and a new element of wickedness and superstition was introduced at those unholy festivals. About the middle of the thirteenth century, we find the mania for persecuting heretics invading the tribes of Teutonic race from France and Italy, backed by all the power of the Pope. Like jealousy, persecution too often makes the meat it feeds on, and many silly, if not harmless, superstitions were rapidly put under the ban of the Church. Now the “Good Lady” and her train begin to recede, they only fill up the background while the Prince of Darkness steps, dark and terrible, in front, and soon draws after him the following of the ancient goddess. Now we hear stories of demoniac possession; now the witches adore a demon of the other sex. With the male element, and its harsher, sterner nature, the sinfulness of these unholy assemblies is infinitely increased; folly becomes guilt, and guilt crime.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a></p>
			<p>From the middle of the fourteenth to the middle of the seventeenth century the history of Europe teems with processes against witches and sorcerers. Before the Reformation it reached its height, in the Catholic world, with the famous bull of Innocent the Eighth in 1484, the infamous <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Malleus Maleficarum</i>, the first of the long list of witch-finding books, and the zeal with which the State lent all the terrors of the law to assist the ecclesiastical inquisitors. Before the tribunals of those inquisitors, in the fifteenth century, innumerable victims were arraigned on the double charge of heresy and sorcery⁠—for the crimes ran in couples, both being children and sworn servants of the Devil. Would that the historian could say that with the era of the Reformation these abominations ceased. The Roman Hierarchy, with her bulls and inquisitors, had sown a bitter crop, which both she and the Protestant Churches were destined to reap; but in no part of the world were the labourers more eager and willing, when the fields were “black” to harvest, than in those very reformed communities which had just shaken off the yoke of Rome, and which had sprung in many cases from the very heretics whom she had persecuted and burnt, accusing them at the same time, of the most malignant sorceries.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a> Their excuse is, that no one is before his age. The intense personality given to the Devil in the Middle Age had possessed the whole mind of Europe. We must take them as we find them, with their bright fancy, their earnest faith, their stern fanaticism, their revolting superstition, just as when we look upon a picture we know that those brilliant hues and tones, that spirit which informs the whole, could never be, were it not for the vulgar earths and oil out of which the glorious work of art is mixed and made. Strangely monotonous are all the witch trials of which Europe has so many to show. At first the accused denies, then under torture she confesses, then relapses and denies; tortured again she confesses again, amplifies her story, and accuses others. When given to the stake, she not seldom asserts all her confessions to be false, which is ascribed to the power which the fiend still has over her. Then she is burnt and her ashes given to the winds. Those who wish to read one unexampled, perhaps for barbarity and superstition, and more curious than the rest from the prominence given in it to a man, may find it in the trial of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Fian, the Scotch wizard, “which doctor was register to the Devil, that sundry times preached at North Baricke (North Berwick, in East Lothian) Kirke, to a number of notorious witches.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a> But we advise no one to venture on a perusal of this tract who is not prepared to meet with the most unutterable accusations and crimes, the most cruel tortures, and the most absurd confessions, followed as usual by the stoutest denial of all that had been confessed; when torture had done her worst on poor human nature, and the soul reasserted at the last her supremacy over the body.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a> One characteristic of all these witch trials, is the fact, that in spite of their unholy connection and intrigues with the Evil One, no witch ever attained to wealth and station by the aid of the Prince of Darkness. The pleasure to do ill, is all the pleasure they feel. This fact alone might have opened the eyes of their persecutors, for if the Devil had the worldly power which they represented him to have, he might at least have raised some of his votaries to temporal rank, and to the pomps and the vanities of this world. An old German proverb expresses this notorious fact, by saying, that “every seven years, a witch is three halfpence richer”; and so with all the unholy means of Hell at their command, they dragged out their lives, along with their black cats, in poverty and wretchedness. To this fate at last, came the worshippers of the great goddess Freyja, whom our forefathers adored as the goddess of love and plenty; and whose car was drawn by those animals which popular superstition has ever since assigned to the “old witch” of our English villages.</p>
			<p>The North was not free, any more than the rest of the Protestant world, from this direful superstition, which ran over Europe like a pestilence in the sixteenth century. In Sweden especially, the witches and their midnight ridings to <em>Blokulla</em>, the black hill, gave occasion to processes as absurd and abominable as the trial of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Fian and the witch-findings of Hopkins. In Denmark, the sorceresses were supposed to meet at Tromsoe high up in Finmark, or even on Heckla in Iceland. The Norse witches met at a Blokolle of their own, or on the Dovrefell, or at other places in Norway or Finmark. As might be expected, we find many traces of witchcraft in these <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tales</i>, but it may be doubted whether these may not be referred rather to the old heathen belief in such arts still lingering in the popular mind than to the processes of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, which were far more a craze and mania of the educated classes acting under a mistaken religious fanaticism against popular superstitions than a movement arising from the mass of the community. Still, in “The Mastermaid,” <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>, the witch of a sister-in-law, who had rolled the apple over to the Prince, and so charmed him, was torn to pieces between twenty-four horses. The old queen in “The Lassie and her Godmother,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>, tries to persuade her son to have the young queen burnt alive for a wicked witch, who was dumb, and had eaten her own babes. In “East o’ the Sun and West o’ the Moon,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, it is a wicked stepmother who has bewitched the prince. In “Bushy Bride,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>, the ugly bride charms the king to sleep, and is at last thrown, with her wicked mother, into a pit full of snakes. In “The Twelve Wild Ducks,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>, the wicked stepmother persuades the king that Snow-white and Rosy-red is a witch, and almost persuades him to burn her alive. In “Tatterhood,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvii</span>, a whole troop of witches come to keep their revels on Christmas eve in the Queen’s Palace, and snap off the young Princess’s head. It is hard, indeed, in tales where Trolls play so great a part, to keep witch and Troll separate; but the above instances will show that the belief in the one, as distinct from the other, exists in the popular superstitions of the North.</p>
			<p>The frequent transformation of men into beasts, in these tales, is another striking feature. This power the gods of the Norseman possessed in common with those of all other mythologies. Europa and her Bull, Leda and her Swan, will occur at once to the reader’s mind; and to come to closer resemblances, just as Athene appears in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Odyssey</i> as an eagle or a swallow perched on the roof of the hall,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a> so Odin flies off as a falcon, and Loki takes the form of a horse or bird. This was only part of that omnipotence which all gods enjoy. But the belief that men, under certain conditions, could also take the shape of animals, is primaeval, and the traditions of every race can tell of such transformations. Herodotus had heard how the Neurians, a Slavonic race, passed for wizards amongst the Scythians and the Greeks settled round the Black Sea, because each of them, once in the year, became a wolf for a few days, and then returned to his natural shape. Pliny, Pomponius Mela, and <abbr>St.</abbr> Augustin, in his great treatise, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Civitate Dei</i>, tell the same story, and Virgil, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eclogues</i>, has sung the same belief.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a> The Latins called such a man, a turn-skin⁠—<i xml:lang="la">versipellis</i>, an expression which exactly agrees with the Icelandic expression for the same thing, and which is probably the true original of our <em>turncoat</em>. In Petronius the superstition appears in its full shape, and is worth repeating. At the banquet of Trimalchion, Nicoros gives the following account of the turn-skins of Nero’s time:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“It happened that my master was gone to Capua to dispose of some secondhand goods. I took the opportunity and persuaded our guest to walk with me to the fifth milestone. He was a valiant soldier, and a sort of grim water-drinking Pluto. About cockcrow, when the moon was shining as bright as midday, we came among the monuments. My friend began addressing himself to the stars, but I was rather in a mood to sing or to count them; and when I turned to look at him, lo! he had already stripped himself and laid down his clothes near him. My heart was in my nostrils, and I stood like a dead man; but he ‘<i xml:lang="la">circumminxit vestimenta</i>,’ and on a sudden became a wolf. Do not think I jest; I would not lie for any man’s estate. But to return to what I was saying. When he became a wolf, he began howling, and fled into the woods. At first I hardly knew where I was, and afterwards, when I went to take up his clothes, they were turned into stone. Who then died with fear but I? Yet I drew my sword, and went cutting the air right and left, till I reached the villa of my sweetheart. I entered the courtyard. I almost breathed my last, the sweat ran down my neck, my eyes were dim, and I thought I should never recover myself. My Melissa wondered why I was out so late, and said to me: ‘Had you come sooner you might at least have helped us, for a wolf has entered the farm, and worried all our cattle; but he had not the best of the joke, for all he escaped, for our slave ran a lance through his neck.’ When I heard this, I could not doubt how it was, and, as it was clear daylight, ran home as fast as a robbed innkeeper. When I came to the spot where the clothes had been turned into stone, I could find nothing except blood. But when I got home, I found my friend the soldier in bed, bleeding at the neck like an ox, and a doctor dressing his wound. I then knew he was a turn-skin, nor would I ever have broke bread with him again; No, not if you had killed me.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>A man who had such a gift or greed was also called <i xml:lang="la">lycanthropus</i>, a man-wolf or wolf-man, which term the Anglo-Saxons translated literally in Canute’s Laws <i xml:lang="ang">verevulf</i>, and the early English <em>werewolf</em>. In old French he was <i xml:lang="fro">loupgarou</i>, which means the same thing; except that <i xml:lang="fro">garou</i> means man-wolf in itself without the antecedent <i xml:lang="fro">loup</i>, so that, as Madden observes, the whole word is one of those reduplications of which we have an example in <em>lukewarm</em>. In Brittany he was <i xml:lang="br">bleizgarou</i> and <i xml:lang="br">denvleiz</i>, formed respectively from <i xml:lang="br">bleiz</i>, wolf, and <i xml:lang="br">den</i>, man; <i xml:lang="fro">garou</i> is merely a distorted form of <i xml:lang="ang">wer</i> or <i xml:lang="ang">vere</i>, man and <i xml:lang="fro">loup</i>. In later French the word became <i xml:lang="fr">waroul</i>, whence the Scotch <i xml:lang="sco">wrout</i>, <i xml:lang="sco">wurl</i>, and <i xml:lang="sco">worlin</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a></p>
			<p>It was not likely that a belief so widely spread should not have extended itself to the North; and the grave assertions of Olaus Magnus in the sixteenth century, in his Treatise <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Gentibus Septentrionalibus</i>, show how common the belief in werewolves was in Sweden so late as the time of Gustavus Vasa. In mythical times the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volsunga Saga</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-48" id="noteref-48" epub:type="noteref">48</a> expressly states of Sigmund and Sinfjötli that they became werewolves⁠—which, we may remark, were Odin’s sacred beasts⁠—just in the same way as Brynhildr and the Valkyries, or corse-choosers, who followed the god of battles to the field, and chose the dead for Valhalla when the fight was done, became swan-maidens, and took the shape of swans. In either case, the wolf’s skin or the swan’s feathery covering was assumed and laid aside at pleasure, though the “<span epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Völundr Quidr</span>,” in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i>, and the stories of “The Fair Melusina,” and other medieval swan-maidens, show that anyone who seized that shape while thus laid aside, had power over its wearer. In later times, when this old heroic belief degenerated into the notion of sorcery, it was supposed that a girdle of wolfskin thrown over the body, or even a slap on the face with a wolfskin glove, would transform the person upon whom the sorcerer practised into the shape of a ravening wolf, which fled at once to the woods, where he remained in that shape for a period which varied in popular belief for nine days, three, seven, or nine years. While in this state he was especially ravenous after young children, whom he carried off as the werewolf carried off William in the old romance, though all werewolves did not treat their prey with the same tenderness as that werewolf treated William.</p>
			<p>But the favourite beast for Norse transformations in historic times, if we may judge from the evidence afforded by the Sagas, was the bear, the king of all their beasts, whose strength and sagacity made him an object of great respect.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-49" id="noteref-49" epub:type="noteref">49</a></p>
			<p>This old belief, then, might be expected to be found in these <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Norse Tales</i>, and accordingly we find men transformed in them into various beasts. Of old these transformations, as we have already stated, were active, if we may use the expression, as well as passive. A man who possessed the gift, frequently assumed the shape of a beast at his own will and pleasure, like the soldier in Petronius. Even now in Norway, it is matter of popular belief that Finns and Lapps, who from time immemorial have passed for the most skilful witches and wizards in the world, can at will assume the shape of bears; and it is a common thing to say of one of those beasts, when he gets unusually savage and daring, “that can be no Christian bear.” On such a bear, in the parish of Oföden, after he had worried to death more than sixty horses and six men, it is said that a girdle of bearskin, the infallible mark of a man thus transformed, was found when he was at last tracked and slain. The tale called “Farmer Weathersky,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xli</span> in this collection, shows that the belief of these spontaneous transformations still exists in popular tradition, where it is easy to see that Farmer Weathersky is only one of the ancient gods degraded into a demon’s shape. His sudden departure through the air, horse, sledge, and lad, and all, and his answer “I’m at home, alike north, and south, and east, and west”; his name itself, and his distant abode, surrounded with the corpses of the slain, sufficiently betray the divinity in disguise. His transformation, too, into a hawk answers exactly to that of Odin when he flew away from the Frost Giant in the shape of that bird. But in these tales such transformations are for the most part passive; they occur not at the will of the person transformed, but through sorcery practised on them by someone else. Thus the White Bear in the beautiful story of “East o’ the Sun and West o’ the Moon,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, is a Prince transformed by his stepmother, just as it is the stepmother who plays the same part in the romance of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">William and the Werewolf</i>. So the horse in “The Widow’s Son,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>, is a Prince over whom a king has cast that shape.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-50" id="noteref-50" epub:type="noteref">50</a> So also in “Lord Peter,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlii</span>, which is the full story of what we have only hitherto known in part as “<span epub:type="se:name.publication.short-story">Puss in Boots</span>,” the cat is a princess bewitched by the Troll who had robbed her of her lands; so also in “The Seven Foals,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliii</span>, and “The Twelve Wild Ducks,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>, the Foals and the Ducks are Princes over whom that fate has come by the power of a witch or a Troll, to whom an unwary promise had been given. Thoroughly mythic is the trait in “The Twelve Wild Ducks,” where the youngest brother reappears with a wild duck’s wing instead of his left arm, because his sister had no time to finish that portion of the shirt, upon the completion of which his retransformation depended.</p>
			<p>But we should ill understand the spirit of the Norsemen, if we supposed that these transformations into beasts were all that the national heart has to tell of beasts and their doings, or that, when they appear, they do so merely as men-beasts, without any power or virtue of their own. From the earliest times, side by side with those productions of the human mind which speak of the dealings of men with men, there has grown up a stock of traditions about animals and their relations with one another, which forms a true Beast Epic, and is full of the liveliest traits of nature. Here, too, it was reserved for Grimm to restore these traditions to their true place in the history of the human mind, and show that the poetry which treats of them is neither satirical nor didactic, though it may contain touches of both these artificial kinds of composition, but, on the contrary, purely and intensely natural. It is Epic, in short, springing out of that deep love of nature and close observation of the habits of animals which is only possible in an early and simple stage of society. It used to be the fashion, when these Beast traditions were noticed, to point to Aesop as their original, but Grimm has sufficiently proved<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a> that what we see in Aesop is only the remains of a great world-old cycle of such traditions which had already, in Aesop’s day, been subjected by the Greek mind to that critical process which a late state of society brings to bear on popular traditions; that they were then already worn and washed out and moralized. He had also shown how the same process went on till in Phaedrus nothing but the dry bones of the traditions, with a drier moral, are served up to the reader; and he has done justice on La Fontaine, who wrote with all the wanton licentiousness of his day, and frittered away the whole nature of his fables by the frivolity of his allusions to the artificial society of his time. Nor has he spared Lessing, who, though he saw through the poverty of Phaedrus as compared with Aesop, and was alive to the weakness of La Fontaine, still wandered about in the classical mist which hung heavy over the learning of the eighteenth century, and saw in the Greek form the perfection of all fable, when in Aesop it really appears in a state of degeneracy and decay. Here too, as in so many other things, we have a proof that the world is older than we think it. The Beast-Fables in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pantcha Tantra</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hitopadesa</i>, the Indian parallels to Aesop, reveal, in the connection in which they occur, and in the moral use to which they are put, a state of society long past that simple early time in which such fictions arise. They must have sprung up in the East in the very dawn of time; and thence travelling in all directions, we find them after many centuries in various shapes, which admit of no mistake as to their first origin, at the very ends of the earth, in countries as opposite as the Poles to each other; in New Zealand and Norway, in Central Africa and Serbia, in the West Indies and in Mongolia; all separated by immense tracts of land or sea from their common centre. To the earnest inquirer, to one who believes that many dark things may yet be solved, it is very satisfactory to see that even Grimm, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reynard the Fox</i>, is at a loss to understand why the North, properly so called, had none of the traditions which the Middle Age moulded into that famous Beast-Epic. But since then the North, as the Great Master himself confesses in his later works, has amply avenged herself for the slight thus cast upon her by mistake. In the year 1834, when Grimm thus expressed his surprise on this point, the North had no such traditions to show in books indeed, but she kept them stored up in her heart in an abundance with which no other land perhaps can vie. This book at least shows how natural it seems to the Norse mind now, and how much more natural of course it seemed in earlier times, when sense went for as much and reflection for so little, that beasts should talk; and how truly and faithfully it has listened and looked for the accents and character of each. The Bear is still the King of Beasts, in which character he appears in “True and Untrue,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, but here, as in Germany, he is no match for the Fox in wit. Thus Reynard plays him a trick which condemns him forever to a stumpy tail in<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span>. He cheats him out of his share of a firkin of butter in<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lvii</span>. He is preferred as Herdsman, in<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>, before either Bear or Wolf, by the old wife who wants someone to tend her flock. Yet all the while he professes immense respect for the Bear, and calls him “Lord,” even when in the very act of outwitting him. In the tale called “Well Done and Ill Paid,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxviii</span>, the crafty fox puts a finish to his misbehaviour to his “Lord Bruin,” by handing him over, bound hand and foot, to the peasant, and by causing his death outright. Here, too, we have an example, which we shall see repeated in the case of the giants, that strength and stature are not always wise, and that wit and wisdom never fail to carry the day against mere brute force. Another tale, however, restores the bear to his true place as the king of beasts, endowed not only with strength, but with something divine and terrible about him which the Trolls cannot withstand. This is “The Cat on the Dovrefell,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. In connection with which, it should be remembered that the same tradition existed in the thirteenth century in Germany,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a> that the bear is called familiarly grandfather in the North, and that the Lapps reckon him rather as akin to men than beasts; that they say he has the strength of ten and the wit of twelve men. If they slay him, they formally beg his pardon, as do also the Ostjaks, a tribe akin to the Lapps, and bring him to their huts with great formalities and mystic songs. To the Wolf, whose nickname is “Graylegs,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a> these tales are more complimentary. He is not the spiteful, stupid, greedy Isengrim of Germany and France. Not that Isengrim, of whom old English fables of the thirteenth century tell us that he became a monk, but when the brethren wished to teach him his letters that he might learn the paternoster, all they could get out of him was <em>lamb, lamb</em>; nor could they ever get him to look to the cross, for his eyes, with his thoughts, “were ever to the woodward.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a> He appears, on the contrary, in “The Giant Who Had No Heart in His Body,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>, as a kindly grateful beast, who repays tenfold out of the hidden store of his supernatural sagacity the gift of the old jade, which Boots had made over to him.</p>
			<p>The horse was a sacred animal among the Teutonic tribes from the first moment of their appearance in history, and Tacitus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a> has related, how in the shade of those woods and groves which served them for temples, white horses were fed at the public cost, whose backs no mortal man crossed, whose neighings and snortings were carefully watched as auguries and omens, and who were thought to be conscious of divine mysteries. In Persia, too, the classical reader will remember how the neighing of a horse decided the choice for the crown. Here, in England, at any rate, we have only to think of Hengist and Horsa, the twin-heroes of the Anglo-Saxon migration, as the legend ran⁠—heroes whose name meant “horse”⁠—and of the vale of the White Horse in <abbr>Berks.</abbr>, where the sacred form still gleams along the down, to be reminded of the sacredness of the horse to our forefathers. The Eddas are filled with the names of famous horses, and the Sagas contain many stories of good steeds, in whom their owners trusted and believed as sacred to this or that particular god. Such a horse is Dapplegrim in<abbr>No.</abbr> <span>xl</span>, of these tales, who saves his master out of all his perils, and brings him to all fortune, and is another example of that mysterious connection with the higher powers which animals in all ages have been supposed to possess.</p>
			<p>Such a friend, too, to the helpless lassie is the Dun Bull in “Katie Woodencloak,” <abbr>No.</abbr> 1, out of whose ear comes the “Wishing Cloth,” which serves up the choicest dishes. The story is probably imperfect, as we should expect to see him again in human shape after his head was cut off, and his skin flayed; but, after being the chief character up to that point, he remains from that time forth in the background, and we only see him darkly in the man who comes out of the face of the rock and supplies the lassie’s wants when she knocks on it. Dun, or blue, or mouse-colour, is the favourite colour for fairy kine. Thus the cow which Guy of Warwick killed was <em>dun</em>. The Huldror in Norway have large flocks of blue kine. In Scotland runs the story of the mouse-coloured Elfin Bull. In Iceland the colour of such kine is <i xml:lang="non">apalgrár</i>, dapple grey. This animal has been an object of adoration and respect from the earliest times, and we need only remind our readers of the sanctity of cows and bulls among the Indians and Egyptians, of “the Golden Calf” in the Bible; of Io and her wanderings from land to land; and, though last, not least, of Audhumla, the Mythic Cow in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i>, who had so large a part in the creation of the first Giant in human form.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a></p>
			<p>The dog, to which, with all his sagacity and faithfulness something unclean and impure clings, as Grimm well observes, plays no very prominent part in these <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tales</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-57" id="noteref-57" epub:type="noteref">57</a> We find him, however, in “Not a Pin to Choose Between Them,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span>, where his sagacity fails to detect his mistress; and, as “the foe of his own house,” the half-bred foxy hound, who chases away the cunning Fox in “Well Done and Ill Paid,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxviii</span>. Still he, too, in popular superstition, is gifted with a sense of the supernatural; he howls when death impends, and in “Buttercup,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>, it is Goldtooth, their dog, who warns Buttercup and his mother of the approach of the old hag. In “Bushy Bride,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span>xlv</span>, he appears only as the lassie’s lapdog, is thrown away as one of her sacrifices, and at last goes to the wedding in her coach; yet in that tale he has something weird about him, and he is sent out by his mistress three times to see if the dawn is coming.</p>
			<p>In one Tale,<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span>, the Goat appears in full force, and dashes out the brains of the Troll, who lived under the bridge over the burn. In another, “Tatterhood,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlviii</span>, he helps the lassie in her onslaught on the witches. He, too, was sacred to Thor in the old mythology, and drew his thundering car. Here something of the divine nature of his former lord, who was the great foe of all Trolls, seems to have been passed on in popular tradition to the animal who had seen so many adventures with the great God who swayed the thunder. This feud between the Goat and the Trolls comes out curiously in “The Old Dame and Her Hen,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, where a goat falls down the trapdoor to the Troll’s house, “Who sent for you, I should like to know, you long-bearded beast” said the Man o’ the Hill, who was in an awful rage; and with that he whipped up the Goat, wrung his head off, and threw him down into the cellar. Still he belonged to one of the heathen gods, and so in later Middle-Age superstition he is assigned to the Devil, who even takes his shape when he presides at the Witches’ Sabbath.</p>
			<p>Nor in this list must the little birds be forgotten which taught the man’s daughter, in the tale of “The Two Stepsisters,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>, how to act in her trials. So, too, in “Katie Woodencloak,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">l</span>, the little bird tells the Prince, “who understood the song of birds very well,” that blood is gushing out of the golden shoe. The belief that some persons had the gift of understanding what the birds said, is primaeval. We pay homage to it in our proverbial expression, “a little bird told me.” Popular traditions and rhymes protect their nests, as in the case of the wren, the robin, and the swallow. Occasionally this gift seems to have been acquired by eating or tasting the flesh of a snake or dragon, as Sigurd, in the Volsung tale, first became aware of Regin’s designs against his life, when he accidentally tasted the heart-blood of Fafnir, whom he had slain in dragon shape, and then all at once the swallow’s song, perched above him, became as intelligible as human speech.</p>
			<p>We now come to a class of beings which plays a large part, and always for ill, in these <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tales</i>. These are the Giants or Trolls. In modern Norse tradition there is little difference between the names, but originally Troll was a more general expression for a supernatural being than Giant,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-58" id="noteref-58" epub:type="noteref">58</a> which was rather confined to a race more dull than wicked. In the Giants we have the wantonness of boundless bodily strength and size, which, trusting entirely to these qualities, falls at last by its own weight. At first, it is true that proverbial wisdom, all the stores of traditional lore, all that could be learnt by what may be called rule of thumb, was ascribed to them. One sympathises too with them, and almost pities them as the representatives of a simple primitive race, whose day is past and gone, but who still possessed something of the innocence and virtue of ancient times, together with a stock of old experience, which, however useful it might be as an example to others, was quite useless to help themselves. They are the old Tories of mythology, as opposed to the Aesir, the advanced liberals. They can look back and say what has been, but to look forward to say what will be and shall be, and to mould the future, is beyond their ken. True as gold to the traditional and received, and worthless as dross for the new and progressive. Such a nature, when unprovoked, is easy and simple; but rouse it, and its exuberant strength rises in a paroxysm of rage, though its clumsy awkward blows, guided by mere cunning, fail to strike the slight and lissom foe who waits for and eludes the stroke, until his reason gives him the mastery over sheer brute force which has wearied itself out by its own exertions.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-59" id="noteref-59" epub:type="noteref">59</a></p>
			<p>This race, and that of the upstart Aesir, though almost always at feud, still had their intervals of common intercourse, and even social enjoyment. Marriages take place between them, visits are paid, feasts are given, ale is breached, and mirth is fast and furious. Thor was the worst foe the giants ever had, and yet he met them sometimes on good terms. They were destined to meet once for all on that awful day, “the twilight of the gods,” but till then, they entertained for each other some sense of mutual respect.</p>
			<p>The Trolls, on the other hand, with whom mankind had more to do, were supposed to be less easy tempered, and more systematically malignant, than the Giants, and with the term were bound up notions of sorcery and unholy power. But mythology is a woof of many colours, in which the hues are shot and blended, so that the various races of supernatural beings are shaded off, and fade away almost imperceptibly into each other; and thus, even in heathen times, it must have been hard to say exactly where the Giant ended and the Troll began. But when Christianity came in, and heathendom fell; when the godlike race of the Aesir became evil demons instead of good genial powers, then all the objects of the old popular belief, whether Aesir, Giants, or Trolls, were mingled together in one superstition, as “no canny.” They were all Trolls, all malignant; and thus it is that, in these tales, the traditions about Odin and his underlings, about the Frost Giants, and about sorcerers and wizards, are confused and garbled; and all supernatural agency that plots man’s ill is the work of Trolls, whether the agent be the arch enemy himself, or giant, or witch, or wizard.</p>
			<p>In tales such as “The Old Dame and Her Hen,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, “The Giant Who Had No Heart in His Body,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>, “Shortshanks,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>, “Boots and the Troll,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>, “Boots Who Ate a Match with the Troll,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>, the easy temper of the old Frost Giants predominates, and we almost pity them as we read. In another, “The Big Bird Dan,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lv</span>, we have a Troll Prince, who appears as a generous benefactor to the young Prince, and lends him a sword by help of which he slays the King of the Trolls, just as we sometimes find in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i> friendly meetings between the Aesir and this or the Frost Giant. In “Tatterhood,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlviii</span>, the Trolls are very near akin to the witches of the Middle Age. In other tales, as “The Mastermaid,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>, “The Blue Belt,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span>, “Farmer Weathersky,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xli</span>, a sort of settled malignity against man appears as the direct working and result of a bad and evil spirit. In “Buttercup,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>, and “The Cat on the Dovrefell,” we have the Troll proper⁠—the supernatural dwellers of the woods and hills, who go to church, and eat men, and porridge, and sausages indifferently, not from malignity, but because they know no better, because it is their nature, and because they have always done so. In one point they all agree⁠—in their place of abode. The wild pine forest that clothes the spurs of the fells, but more than all, the interior recesses of the rocky fell itself, is where the Trolls live. Thither they carry off the children of men, and to them belongs all the untold riches of the mineral world. There, in caves and clefts in the steep face of the rock, sits the Troll, as the representative of the old giants, among heaps of gold and silver and precious things. They stride off into the dark forest by day, whither no rays of the sun can pierce; they return home at nightfall, feast themselves full, and snore out the night. One thing was fatal to them⁠—the sight of the sun. If they looked him full in the face, his glory was too great for them, and they burst, as in “Lord Peter,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlii</span>, and in “The Old Dame and Her Hen,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. This, too, is a deeply mythic trait. The old religion of the North was a bright and lively faith; it lived in the light of joy and gladness; its gods were the “blithe powers”; opposed to them were the dark powers of mist and gloom, who could not bear the glorious face of the Sun, of Baldr’s beaming visage, or the bright flash of Thor’s levin bolt.</p>
			<p>In one aspect, the whole race of Giants and Trolls stands out in strong historical light. There can be little doubt that, in their continued existence amongst the woods, and rocks, and hills, we have a memory of the gradual suppression and extinction of some hostile race, who gradually retired into the natural fastnesses of the land, and speedily became mythic. Nor, if we bear in mind their natural position, and remember how constantly the infamy of sorcery has clung to the Finns and Lapps, shall we have far to go to seek this ancient race, even at the present day. Between this outcast nomad race, which wandered from forest to forest, and from fell to fell, without a fixed place of abode, and the old natural powers and Frost Giants, the minds of the race which adored Odin and the Aesir soon engendered a monstrous man-eating crossbreed of supernatural beings, who fled from contact with the intruders as soon as the first great struggle was over, abhorred the light of day, and looked upon agriculture and tillage as a dangerous innovation which destroyed their hunting fields, and was destined finally to root them out from off the face of the earth. This fact appears in countless stories all over the globe, for man is true to himself in all climes, and the savage in Africa or across the Rocky Mountains, dreads tillage and detests the plough as much as any Lapp or Samoyed. “See what pretty playthings, mother!” cries the Giants’ daughter as she unties her apron, and shows her a plough, and horses, and peasants. “Back with them this instant,” cries the mother in wrath, “and put them down as carefully as you can, for these playthings can do our race great harm, and when these come we must budge.” “What sort of an earthworm is this?” said one Giant to another, when they met a man as they walked. “These are the earthworms that will one day eat us up, brother,” answered the other; and soon both Giants left that part of Germany. Nor does this trait appear less strongly in these <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Norse Tales</i>. The Giants or Trolls can neither brew nor wash properly, as we see in “Shortshanks,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>, where the Ogre has to get Shortshanks to brew his ale for him; and in “East o’ the Sun and West o’ the Moon,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, where none of the Trolls are able to wash out the spot of tallow. So also in the “The Two Stepsisters,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>, the old witch is forced to get human maids to do her household-work; and, lastly, the best example of all, in “Lord Peter,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlii</span>, where agriculture is plainly a secret of mankind, which the Giants were eager to learn, but which was a branch of knowledge beyond their power to attain.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“Stop a bit,” said the Cat, “and I’ll tell you how the farmer sets to work to get in his winter rye.”</p>
				<p>And so she told him such a long story about the winter rye.</p>
				<p>“First of all, you see, he ploughs the field, and then he dungs it, and then he ploughs it again, and then he harrows it,” and so she went on till the sun rose.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Before we leave these gigantic natural powers, let us linger a moment to point out how heartily the Winds are sketched in these <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tales</i> as four brothers; of whom, of course, the North wind is the oldest, and strongest, and roughest. But though rough in form and tongue, he is a genial, kindhearted fellow after all. He carries the lassie to the castle, “East o’ the Sun and West o’ the Moon,” whither none of his brothers had strength to blow. All he asks is that she won’t be afraid, and then he takes a good rest, and puffs himself up with as much breath as ever he can hold, begins to blow a storm, and off they go. So, too, in “The Lad Who Went to the North Wind,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>, though he can’t restore the meal he carried off, he gives the lad three things which make his fortune, and amply repay him. He, too, like the Grecian Boreas, is divine, and lineally descended from Hraesvelgr, that great giant in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i>, who sits “at the end of the world in eagle’s shape, and when he flaps his wings, all the winds come that blow upon men.”</p>
			<p>Enough surely has now been said to show that the old religion and mythology of the Norseman still lives disguised in these popular tales. Besides this internal evidence, we find here and there, in the written literature of earlier days, hints that the same stories were even then current, and current then as now, among the lower classes. Thus, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">King Sverri’s Saga</i> we read: “And so it was just like what is said to have happened in old stories of what the king’s children suffered from their stepmother’s ill-will.” And again, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Olof Tryggvason’s Saga</i> by the monk Odd: “And better is it to hear such things with mirth than stepmother’s stories which shepherds tell, where no one can tell whether anything is true, and where the king is always made the least in their narrative.” But, in truth, no such positive evidence is needed. Anyone who has read the Volsung tale as we have given it, will be at no loss to see where the “little birds” who speak to the Prince and the lassie, in these tales, come from; nor when they read in the “Big Bird Dan,”<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lv</span>, about “the naked sword” which the Princess lays by her side every night, will they fail to recognize Sigurd’s sword <em>Gram</em>, which he laid between himself and Brynhildr when he rode through the flame and won her for Gunnar. These mythical deep-rooted groves, throwing out fresh shoots from age to age in the popular literature of the race, are far more convincing proofs of the early existence of these traditions than any mere external evidence.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-60" id="noteref-60" epub:type="noteref">60</a></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
