<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XCV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article data-parent="tales-from-the-fjeld" id="reynard-wants-to-taste-horse-flesh" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Reynard Wants to Taste Horse-Flesh</h2>
			<p>One day as Bruin lay by a horse which he had slain, and was hard at work eating it, Reynard was out that day too, and came up spying about and licking his lips, if he might get a taste of the horse-flesh. So he doubled and turned till he got just behind Bruin’s back, and then he jumped on the other side of the carcass and snapped a mouthful as he ran by. Bruin was not slow either, for he made a grab at Reynard and caught the tip of his red brush in his paw; and ever since then Reynard’s brush is white at the tip, as any one may see.</p>
			<p>But that day Bruin was merry, and called out, ‘ “Bide a bit, Reynard; and come hither, and I’ll tell you how to catch a horse for yourself.”</p>
			<p>Yes, Reynard was ready enough to learn, but he did not for all that trust himself to go very close to Bruin.</p>
			<p>“Listen,” said Bruin, “when you see a horse asleep, sunning himself in the sunshine, you must mind and bind yourself fast by the hair of his tail to your brush, and then you must make your teeth meet in the flesh of his thigh.”</p>
			<p>As you may fancy, it was not long before Reynard found out a horse that lay asleep in the sunshine, and then he did as Bruin had told him; for he knotted and bound himself well into the hair of his tail, and made his teeth meet in the horse’s thigh.</p>
			<p>Up sprang the horse, and began to kick and rear and gallop, so that Reynard was dashed against stock and stone, and got battered black and blue, so that he was not far off losing both wit and sense. And while the horse galloped, they passed Jack Longears, the Hare.</p>
			<p>“Whither away so fast, Reynard?” cried Jack Longears.</p>
			<p>“Post haste, on business of life and death, dear Jack,” cried Reynard.</p>
			<p>And with that Jack stood up on his hind legs, and laughed till his sides ached and his jaws split right up to his ears. It was so funny to see Reynard ride post haste.</p>
			<p>But you must know, since that ride Reynard has never thought of catching a horse for himself. For that once at least it was Bruin who had the best of it in wit, though they do say he is most often as simple-minded as the Trolls.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
