<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Taper Tom</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article data-parent="tales-from-the-fjeld" id="taper-tom" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h3 epub:type="title">Taper Tom</h3>
			<p>Once on a time there was a King, who had a daughter, and she was so lovely, that her good looks were well known far and near; but she was so sad and serious, she could never be got to laugh; and, besides, she was so high and mighty, that she said “No” to all who wooed her to wife, and she would have none of them, were they ever so grand⁠—lords and princes, it was all the same. The king had long ago got tired of this, for he thought she might just as well marry, she, too, like the rest of the world. There was no good waiting; she was quite old enough, nor would she be any richer, for she was to have half the kingdom, that came to her as her mother’s heir.</p>
			<p>So he had it given out at the church door both quick and soon, that anyone who could get his daughter to laugh should have her and half the kingdom. But if there were anyone who tried and could not, he was to have three red stripes cut out of his back, and salt rubbed in; and sure it was that there were many sore backs in that kingdom, for lovers and wooers came from north and south, and east and west, thinking it nothing at all to make a king’s daughter laugh; and brave fellows they were, some of them, too; but for all their tricks and capers, there sat the princess, just as sad and serious as she had been before.</p>
			<p>Now, hard by the Palace lived a man who had three sons, and they too had heard how the king had given it out that the man who could make the princess laugh was to have her to wife and half the kingdom.</p>
			<p>The eldest, he was for setting off first; so he strode off; and when he came to the king’s grange, he told the king he would be glad to try to make the princess laugh.</p>
			<p>“All very well, my man,” said the king; “but it’s sure to be no good, for so many have been here and tried. My daughter is so sorrowful, it’s no use trying, and I don’t at all wish that anyone should come to grief.”</p>
			<p>But he thought there was use. It couldn’t be such a very hard thing for him to get a princess to laugh, for so many had laughed at him, both gentle and simple, when he listed for a soldier, and learnt his drill under Corporal Jack. So he went off to the courtyard, under the princess’s window, and began to go through his drill as Corporal Jack had taught him. But it was no good, the princess was just as sad and serious, and did not so much as smile at him once. So they took him, and cut three broad red stripes out of his back, and sent him home again.</p>
			<p>Well! he had hardly got home before his second brother wanted to set off. He was a schoolmaster, and a wonderful figure of fun besides; he was lopsided, for he had one leg shorter than the other, and one moment he was as little as a boy, and in another, when he stood on his long leg, he was as tall and long as a Troll. Besides this, he was a powerful preacher.</p>
			<p>So when he came to the king’s grange, and said he wished to make the princess laugh, the king thought it might not be so unlikely after all. “But Heaven help you!” he said, “if you don’t make her laugh. We are for cutting the stripes broader and broader for every one that tries.”</p>
			<p>Then the schoolmaster strode off to the courtyard, and put himself before the princess’s window, and read and preached like seven parsons, and sang and chanted like seven clerks, as loud as all the parsons and clerks in the country round. The king laughed loud at him, and was forced to hold the posts in the gallery, and the princess was just going to put a smile on her lips, but all at once she got as sad and serious as ever; and so it fared no better with Paul the schoolmaster than with Peter the soldier⁠—for you must know one was called Peter and the other Paul. So they took him and cut three red stripes out of his back, and rubbed the salt well in, and then they sent him home again.</p>
			<p>Then the youngest was all for setting out, and his name was Taper Tom; but his brothers laughed and jeered at him, and showed him their sore backs, and his father would not give him leave, for he said, how could it be of any use to him, when he had no sense, for, wasn’t it true that he neither knew anything or could do anything? There he sat in the ingle by the chimney corner, like a cat, and grubbed in the ashes and split fir tapers. That was why they called him “Taper Tom.” But Taper Tom wouldn’t give in, for he growled and grizzled so long, that they got tired of his growling, and so, at last, he too got leave to go to the king’s grange, and try his luck.</p>
			<p>When he got to the king’s grange he did not say he wished to try to make the princess laugh, but asked if he could get a place there. “No,” they had no place for him; but for all that Taper Tom wouldn’t take an answer; they must want someone, he said, to carry wood and water for the kitchen-maid, in such a big grange as that⁠—that was what he said; and the king thought it might very well be, for he, too, got tired of his worry, and the end was, Taper Tom got leave to stay there and carry wood and water for the kitchen-maid.</p>
			<p>So, one day, when he was going to fetch water from the beck, he set eyes on a big fish, which lay under an old fir stump, where the water had eaten into the bank, and he put his bucket so softly under the fish, and caught it. But as he was going home to the grange he met an old woman who led a golden goose by a string.</p>
			<p>“Good day, godmother,” said Taper Tom; “that’s a pretty bird you have got; and what fine feathers!⁠—they dazzle one a long way off. If one only had such feathers one might leave off splitting fir tapers.”</p>
			<p>The goody was just as pleased with the fish Tom had in his bucket, and said, if he would give her the fish, he might have the golden goose; and it was such a goose, that when anyone touched it, he stuck fast to it, if Tom only said, “Hang on, if you care to come with us.”</p>
			<p>Yes! that swap Taper Tom was willing enough to make.</p>
			<p>“A bird is as good as a fish, any day,” he said to himself; and if it’s such a bird as you say, I can use it as a fishhook.” That was what he said to the goody, and was so pleased with the goose. Now, he hadn’t gone far before he met another old woman, and as soon as she saw the lovely gold goose she was all for running up to it and patting it; and she spoke so prettily, and coaxed him so, and begged him give her leave to stroke his lovely golden goose.</p>
			<p>“With all my heart,” said Taper Tom; “but, mind you don’t pluck out any of its feathers.”</p>
			<p>Just as she stroked the goose, he said,</p>
			<p>“Hang on, if you care to come with us!”</p>
			<p>The goody pulled and tore, but she was forced to hang on, whether she would or no, and Taper Tom went before, as though he alone were with the golden goose. So when he had gone a bit further, he met a man who had a thorn in his side against the goody for a trick she had played him. So, when he saw how hard she struggled and strove to get free, and how fast she stuck, he thought he would be quite safe in giving her one for her nob, to pay off the old grudge, and so he just gave her a kick with his foot.</p>
			<p>“Hang on, if you care to come with us!” called out Tom, and then the man had to limp along on one leg, whether he would or no, and when he jibbed and jibed, and tried to break loose, it was still worse for him, for he was all but falling flat on his back every step he took.</p>
			<p>So they went on a good bit till they had about come to the king’s grange. There they met the king’s smith, who was going to the smithy, and had a great pair of tongs in his hand. Now you must know this smith was a merry fellow, who was as full of tricks and pranks as an egg is full of meat, and when he saw this string come hobbling and limping along, he laughed so that he was almost bent in two, and then he bawled out, “Surely this is a new flock of geese the princess is going to have; who can tell which is goose and which gander! Ah! I see, this must be the gander that toddles in front. Goosey! goosey! goosey!” he called out; and with that he coaxed them to him, and threw his hands about as though he were scattering corn for the geese.</p>
			<p>But the flock never stopped⁠—on it went, and all that the goody and the man did was to look daggers at the smith for making game of them. Then the smith went on,</p>
			<p>“It would be fine fun to see if I could hold the whole flock, so many as they are”; for he was a stout strong fellow, and so he took hold, with his big tongs, by the old man’s coat tail, and the man all the while bellowed and wriggled; but Taper Tom only said,</p>
			<p>“Hang on, if you care to come with us.”</p>
			<p>So the smith had to go along too. He bent his back and stuck his heels into the hill, and tried to get loose; but it was all no good, he stuck fast, as though he had been screwed tight with his own anvil, and, whether he would or no, he had to dance along with the rest.</p>
			<p>So, when they came near to the king’s grange, the mastiff ran out and began to bay and bark as though they were wolves or beggars; and when the princess looked out of the window to see what was the matter, and set eyes on this strange pack, she laughed inwardly. But Taper Tom was not content with that.</p>
			<p>“Bide a bit,” he said, “she’ll soon have to open the door of her mouth wider”; and as he said that he turned off with his band to the back of the grange.</p>
			<p>So, when they passed by the kitchen, the door stood open, and the cook was just beating the porridge; but when she saw Taper Tom and his pack she came running out at the door, with her brush in one hand, and a wooden ladle full of smoking porridge in the other, and she laughed as though her sides would split; and when she saw the smith there too, she slapped her thigh and went off again in a loud peal. But when she had laughed her laugh out, she too thought the golden goose so lovely she must just stroke it.</p>
			<p>“Taper Tom! Taper Tom!” she bawled out, and came running out with the ladle of porridge in her fist, “may I have leave to stroke that pretty bird of yours?”</p>
			<p>“Better let her stroke me,” said the smith.</p>
			<p>“I daresay,” said Taper Tom.</p>
			<p>But when the cook heard that she got angry.</p>
			<p>“What is that you say!” she cried, and let fly at the smith with the ladle.</p>
			<p>“Hang on, if you care to come with us,” said Taper Tom. So she stuck fast, she, too; and for all her kicks and plunges, and all her scolding and screaming, and all her riving and striving, and all her rage, she too had to limp along with them.</p>
			<p>But when they came outside the window of the princess, there she stood, waiting for them; and when she saw they had taken the cook too, with her ladle and brush, she opened her mouth wide, and laughed loud, so that the king had to hold her upright. So Taper Tom got the princess and half the kingdom; and they had such a merry wedding, it was heard and talked of far and wide.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
