<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LXXXIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-death-of-chanticleer-and-the-greedy-cat" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2>THE DEATH OF CHANTICLEER, AND THE GREEDY CAT.</h2>
			<p>All this time Edward and the lassies sat by and listened. It was dull work for Edward, he knew little Norse, and so could not follow the stories; sometimes he stared in a dull vacant way at the girls, and sometimes he consulted Bradshaw's Foreign Guide. Whether he solved any of the many mysteries of that most mysterious volume, I know not, let us hope he did. "Bored" is the word which best expressed his looks. But as for Christine and Karin, they knitted and knitted, and laughed and sniggered at the story, which Anders, I must say, told in a way which would have rejoiced his old grandmother's heart. But they were not to have all the fun and no work. It was now their turn to be amusing, and help to kill the ancient enemy, time.</p>
			<p>When <i>The Honest Penny</i> was over, Anders, almost without taking breath, said,—</p>
			<p>"Now, girls, it is my right to call for a tune. You know lots of stories, and can tell them better than I. So, Christine, do you tell <i>The Death of Chanticleer</i>; and you, Karin, <i>The Greedy Cat</i>. And mind you act them as well as tell them. They are nursery tales meant for children, and mind you tell them well."</p>
			<p>I am bound to say that Christine, who was a very pretty girl, now no doubt the happy mother of children, told <i>The Death of Chanticleer</i> in a way which would have gained her in China the post of Own Story-teller to the Emperor's children. Without a blush, and without even the stereotyped "unaccustomed as I am to public story-telling," she began. "This is the story of—</p>
			<h4>THE DEATH OF CHANTICLEER.</h4>
			<p>"Once on a time there were a Cock and a Hen, who walked out into the field, and scratched, and scraped, and scrabbled. All at once, Chanticleer found a burr of hop, and Partlet found a barley-corn; and they said they would make malt and brew Yule ale.</p>
			<p>"'Oh! I pluck barley, and I malt malt, and I brew ale, and the ale is good,' cackled dame Partlet.</p>
			<p>"'Is the wort strong enough?' crew Chanticleer; and as he crowed he flew up on the edge of the cask, and tried to have a taste; but, just as he bent over to drink a drop, he took to flapping his wings, and so he fell head over heels into the cask, and was drowned.</p>
			<p>"When dame Partlet saw that, she clean lost her wits, and flew up into the chimney-corner, and fell a-screaming and screeching out. 'Harm in the house! harm in the house!' she screeched out all in a breath, and there was no stopping her.</p>
			<p>"'What ails you, dame Partlet, that you sit there sobbing and sighing?' said the Handquern.</p>
			<p>"'Why not?' said dame Partlet; 'when goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the cask and drowned himself, and lies dead? That's why I sigh and sob.'</p>
			<p>"'Well, if I can do naught else, I will grind and groan,' said the Handquern; and so it fell to grinding as fast as it could.</p>
			<p>"When the Chair heard that, it said—</p>
			<p>"'What ails you, Handquern, that you grind and groan so fast and oft?'</p>
			<p>"'Why not, when goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the cask and drowned himself; and dame Partlet sits in the ingle, and sighs and sobs? That's why I grind and groan,' said the Handquern.</p>
			<p>"'If I can do naught else, I will crack,' said the Chair; and, with that, he fell to creaking and cracking.</p>
			<p>"When the Door heard that, it said,—</p>
			<p>"'What's the matter? Why do you creak and crack so, Mr. Chair?'</p>
			<p>"'Why not?' said the Chair; 'goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the cask and drowned himself; dame Partlet sits in the ingle, sighing and sobbing; and the Handquern grinds and groans. That's why I creak and crackle, and croak and crack.'</p>
			<p>"'Well,' said the Door, 'if I can do naught else, I can rattle and bang, and whistle and slam;' and, with that, it began to open and shut, and bang and slam, it deaved one to hear, and all one's teeth chattered.</p>
			<p>"All this the Stove heard, and it opened its mouth and called out—</p>
			<p>"'Door! Door! why all this slamming and banging?'</p>
			<p>"'Why not?' said the Door; 'when goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the cask and drowned himself; dame Partlet sits in the ingle, sighing and sobbing; the Handquern grinds and groans, and the Chair creaks and cracks. That's why I bang and slam.'</p>
			<p>"'Well,' said the Stove, 'if I can do naught else, I can smoulder and smoke;' and so it fell a-smoking and steaming till the room was all in a cloud.</p>
			<p>"The Axe saw this, as it stood outside, and peeped with its shaft through the window,—</p>
			<p>"'What's all this smoke about, Mrs. Stove?' said the Axe, in a sharp voice.</p>
			<p>"'Why not? said the Stove; 'when goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the cask and drowned himself; dame Partlet sits in the ingle, sighing and sobbing; the Handquern grinds and groans; the Chair creaks and cracks, and the Door bangs and slams. That's why I smoke and steam.'</p>
			<p>"'Well, if I can do naught else, I can rive and rend,' said the Axe; and, with that, it fell to riving and rending all round about.</p>
			<p>"This the Aspen stood by and saw.</p>
			<p>"'Why do you rive and rend everything so, Mr. Axe?' said the Aspen.</p>
			<p>"'Goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the ale-cask and drowned himself,' said the Axe; 'dame Partlet sits in the ingle, sighing and sobbing; the Handquern grinds and groans; the Chair creaks and cracks; the Door slams and bangs, and the Stove smokes and steams. That's why I rive and rend all about.'</p>
			<p>"'Well, if I can do naught else,' said the Aspen, 'I can quiver and quake in all my leaves;' so it grew all of a quake.</p>
			<p>"The Birds saw this, and twittered out,—</p>
			<p>"'Why do you quiver and quake, Miss Aspen?'</p>
			<p>"'Goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the ale-cask and drowned himself,' said the Aspen, with a trembling voice; 'dame Partlet sits in the ingle, sighing and sobbing; the Handquern grinds and groans; the Chair creaks and cracks; the Door slams and bangs; the Stove steams and smokes; and the Axe rives and rends. That's why I quiver and quake.'</p>
			<p>"Well, if we can do naught else, we will pluck off all our feathers,' said the Birds; and, with that, they fell a-pilling and plucking themselves till the room was full of feathers.</p>
			<p>"This the Master stood by and saw, and, when the feathers flew about like fun, he asked the Birds,—</p>
			<p>"'Why do you pluck off all your feathers, you Birds?'</p>
			<p>"'Oh! goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the ale-cask and drowned himself,' twittered out the Birds; 'dame Partlet sits sighing and sobbing in the ingle; the Handquern grinds and groans; the Chair creaks and cracks; the Door slams and bangs; the Stove smokes and steams; the Axe rives and rends, and the Aspen quivers and quakes. That's why we are pilling and plucking all our feathers off.'</p>
			<p>"'Well, if I can do nothing else, I can tear the brooms asunder,' said the man; and, with that, he fell tearing and tossing the brooms till the birch-twigs flew about east and west.</p>
			<p>"The goody stood cooking porridge for supper, and saw all this.</p>
			<p>"'Why, man!' she called out; 'what are you tearing the brooms to bits for?'</p>
			<p>"'Oh!' said the man, 'goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the ale-vat and drowned himself; dame Partlet sits sighing and sobbing in the ingle; the Handquern grinds and groans; the Chair cracks and creaks; the Door slams and bangs; the Stove smokes and steams; the Axe rives and rends; the Aspen quivers and quakes; the Birds are pilling and plucking all their feathers off, and that's why I am tearing the besoms to bits.'</p>
			<p>"'So, so!' said the goody; 'then I'll dash the porridge over all the walls;' and she did it; for she took one spoonful after the other and dashed it against the walls, so that no one could see what they were made of for very porridge.</p>
			<p>"That was how they drank the burial ale after goodman Chanticleer, who fell into the brewing-vat and was drowned; and, if you don't believe it, you may set off thither and have a taste both of the ale and the porridge."</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>When Christine ended, I did not tell them what I could now tell them, that this story of <i>The Death of Chanticleer</i> is <i>mutatis mutandis</i>, the very same story as one in <i>Grimm's Tales</i>, and another in the Scotch collection of Robert Chambers. But alas! I heard <i>The Death of Chanticleer</i> up on the Fjeld long before those Scotch Stories appeared in print, and so, as some of these stories say, I could tell them nothing about it.</p>
			<p>Karin was not so good a story-teller as Christine, but she still told her story well. Besides, it was harder to tell, and required an effort of memory, like that needed in our <i>This is the House that Jack built</i>. <i>The Greedy Cat</i> has a wildness of its own, and is full of humour. Here it is—</p>
			<h4>THE GREEDY CAT.</h4>
			<p>"Once on a time there was a man who had a cat, and she was so awfully big, and such a beast to eat, he couldn't keep her any longer. So she was to go down to the river with a stone round her neck, but before she started she was to have a meal of meat. So the goody set before her a bowl of porridge and a little trough of fat. That she crammed into her, and ran off and jumped through the window. Outside stood the goodman by the barn door, threshing.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, goodman,' said the cat.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, pussy,' said the goodman; 'have you had any food to-day?'</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I've had a little, but I'm 'most fasting,' said the cat; 'it was only a bowl of porridge and a trough of fat—and, now I think of it, I'll take you too,' and so she took the goodman and gobbled him up.</p>
			<p>"When she had done that, she went into the byre, and there sat the goody milking.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, goody,' said the cat.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, pussy,' said the goody; 'are you here, and have you eaten up your food yet?'</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I've eaten a little to-day, but I'm 'most fasting,' said pussy; 'it was only a bowl of porridge, and a trough of fat, and the goodman—and, now I think of it, I'll take you too,' and so she took the goody and gobbled her up.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, you cow at the manger,' said the cat to Daisy the cow.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, pussy,' said the bell-cow; 'have you had any food to-day?'</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I've had a little, but I'm 'most fasting,' said the cat; 'I've only had a bowl of porridge, and a trough of fat, and the goodman, and the goody—and, now I think of it, I'll take you too,' and so she took the cow and gobbled her up.</p>
			<p>"Then off she set up into the home-field, and there stood a man picking up leaves.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, you leaf-picker in the field,' said the cat.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, pussy; have you had anything to eat to-day?' said the leaf-picker.</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I've had a little, but I'm 'most fasting,' said the cat; 'it was only a bowl of porridge, and a trough of fat, and the goodman and the goody, and Daisy the cow—and, now I think of it, I'll take you too.' So she took the leaf-picker and gobbled him up.</p>
			<p>"Then she came to a heap of stones, and there stood a stoat and peeped out.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Mr. Stoat of Stoneheap,' said the cat.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Mrs. Pussy; have you had anything to eat to-day?'</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I've had a little, but I'm 'most fasting,' said the cat; 'it was only a bowl of porridge, and a trough of fat, and the goodman, and the goody, and the cow, and the leaf-picker—and, now I think of it, I'll take you too.' So she took the stoat and gobbled him up.</p>
			<p>"When she had gone a bit farther, she came to a hazel-brake, and there sat a squirrel gathering nuts.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Sir Squirrel of the Brake,' said the cat.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Mrs. Pussy; have you had anything to eat to-day?'</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I've had a little, but I'm 'most fasting,' said the cat; 'it was only a bowl of porridge, and a trough of fat, and the goodman, and the goody, and the cow, and the leaf-picker, and the stoat—and, now I think of it, I'll take you too.' So she took the squirrel and gobbled him up.</p>
			<p>"When she had gone a little farther, she saw Reynard the Fox, who was prowling about by the woodside.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Reynard Slyboots,' said the cat.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Mrs. Pussy; have you had anything to eat to-day?'</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I've had a little, but I'm 'most fasting,' said the cat; 'it was only a bowl of porridge, and a trough of fat, and the goodman, and the goody, and the cow, and the leaf-picker, and the stoat, and the squirrel—and, now I think of it, I'll take you too.' So she took Reynard and gobbled him up.</p>
			<p>"When she had gone a while farther she met Long Ears the Hare.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Mr. Hopper the Hare,' said the cat.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Mrs. Pussy; have you had anything to eat to-day?'</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I've had a little, but I'm 'most fasting,' said the cat; 'it was only a bowl of porridge, and a trough of fat, and the goodman, and the goody, and the cow, and the leaf-picker, and the stoat, and the squirrel, and the fox—and, now I think of it, I'll take you too.' So she took the hare and gobbled him up.</p>
			<p>"When she had gone a bit farther, she met a wolf.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, you Greedy Greylegs,' said the cat.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Mrs. Pussy; have you had anything to eat to-day?'</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I've had a little, but I'm 'most fasting,' said the cat; 'it was only a bowl of porridge, and a trough of fat, and the goodman, and the goody, and the cow, and the leaf-picker, and the stoat, and the squirrel, and the fox and the hare—and, now I think of it, I may as well take you too.' So she took and gobbled up Greylegs too.</p>
			<p>"So she went on into the wood, and when she had gone far and farther than far, o'er hill and dale, she met a bear-cub.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, you bare-breeched Bear,' said the cat.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Mrs. Pussy,' said the bear-cub; 'have you had anything to eat to-day?'</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I've had a little, but I'm 'most fasting,' said the cat; 'it was only a bowl of porridge, and a trough of fat, and the goodman, and the goody, and the cow, and the leaf-picker, and the stoat, and the squirrel, and the fox, and the hare, and the wolf—and, now I think of it, I may as well take you too,' and so she took the bear-cub and gobbled him up.</p>
			<p>"When the cat had gone a bit farther, she met a she-bear, who was tearing away at a stump till the splinters flew, so angry was she at having lost her cub.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, you Mrs. Bruin,' said the cat.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Mrs. Pussy; have you had anything to eat to-day?'</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I've had a little, but I'm 'most fasting,' said the cat; 'it was only a bowl of porridge, and a trough of fat, and the goodman, and the goody, and the cow, and the leaf-picker, and the stoat, and the squirrel, and the fox, and the hare, and the wolf, and the bear-cub—and, now I think of it, I'll take you too,' and so she took Mrs. Bruin and gobbled her up too.</p>
			<p>"When the cat got still farther on, she met Baron Bruin himself.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, you Baron Bruin,' said the cat.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Mrs. Pussy,' said Bruin; 'have you had anything to eat to-day?'</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I've had a little, but I'm 'most fasting,' said the cat; 'it was only a bowl of porridge, and a trough of fat, and the goodman, and the goody, and the cow, and the leaf-picker, and the stoat, and the squirrel, and the fox, and the hare, and the wolf, and the bear-cub, and the she-bear—and, now I think of it, I'll take you too,' and so she took Bruin and ate him up too.</p>
			<p>"So the cat went on and on, and farther than far, till she came to the abodes of men again, and there she met a bridal train on the road.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, you bridal train on the king's highway,' said she.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Mrs. Pussy; have you had anything to eat to-day?'</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I've had a little, but I'm 'most fasting,' said the cat; 'it was only a bowl of porridge, and a trough of fat, and the goodman, and the goody, and the cow, and the leaf-picker, and the stoat, and the squirrel, and the fox, and the hare, and the wolf, and the bear-cub, and the she-bear, and the he-bear—and, now I think of it, I'll take you too,' and so she rushed at them, and gobbled up both the bride and bridegroom, and the whole train, with the cook and the fiddler, and the horses, and all.</p>
			<p>"When she had gone still farther, she came to a church, and there she met a funeral.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, you funeral train,' said she.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Mrs. Pussy; have you had anything to eat to-day?'</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I've had a little, but I'm 'most fasting,' said the cat; 'it was only a bowl of porridge, and a trough of fat, and the goodman, and the goody, and the cow, and the leaf-picker, and the stoat, and the squirrel, and the fox, and the hare, and the wolf, and the bear-cub, and the she-bear, and the he-bear, and the bride and bridegroom and the whole train—and, now, I don't mind if I take you too,' and so she fell on the funeral train and gobbled up both the body and the bearers.</p>
			<p>"Now when the cat had got the body in her, she was taken up to the sky, and when she had gone a long, long way, she met the moon.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Mrs. Moon,' said the cat.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Mrs. Pussy; have you had anything to eat to-day?'</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I've had a little, but I'm 'most fasting,' said the cat; 'it was only a bowl of porridge, and a trough of fat, and the goodman, and the goody, and the cow, and the leaf-picker, and the stoat, and the squirrel, and the fox, and the hare, and the wolf, and the bear-cub, and the she-bear, and the he-bear, and the bride and bridegroom and the whole train, and the funeral train—and, now I think of it, I don't mind if I take you too,' and so she seized hold of the moon, and gobbled her up, both new and full.</p>
			<p>"So the cat went a long way still, and then she met the sun.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, you Sun in heaven.'</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Mrs. Pussy,' said the sun; 'have you had anything to eat to-day?'</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I've had a little, but I'm 'most fasting,' said the cat; 'it was only a bowl of porridge, and a trough of fat, and the goodman, and the goody, and the cow, and the leaf-picker, and the stoat, and the squirrel, and the fox, and the hare, and the wolf, and the bear-cub, and the she-bear, and the he-bear, and the bride and bridegroom, and the whole train, and the funeral train, and the moon—and, now I think of it, I don't mind if I take you too,' and so she rushed at the sun in heaven and gobbled him up.</p>
			<p>"So the cat went far and farther than far, till she came to a bridge, and on it she met a big Billygoat.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, you Billygoat on Broad-bridge,' said the cat.</p>
			<p>"'Good day, Mrs. Pussy; have you had anything to eat to-day?' said the Billygoat.</p>
			<p>"'Oh, I've had a little, but I'm 'most fasting; I've only had a bowl of porridge, and a trough of fat, and the goodman, and the goody in the byre, and Daisy the cow at the manger, and the leaf-picker in the home-field, and Mr. Stoat of Stoneheap, and Sir Squirrel of the Brake, and Reynard Slyboots, and Mr. Hopper the Hare, and Greedy Greylegs the Wolf, and Bare-breech the Bear-cub, and Mrs. Bruin, and Baron Bruin, and a Bridal train on the king's highway, and a Funeral at the church, and Lady Moon in the sky, and Lord Sun in heaven, and, now I think of it, I'll take you too.'</p>
			<p>"'That we'll fight about," said the Billygoat, and butted at the cat till she fell right over the bridge into the river, and there she burst.</p>
			<p>"So they all crept out one after the other, and went about their business, and were just as good as ever, all that the cat had gobbled up. The Goodman of the house, and the Goody in the byre, and Daisy the cow at the manger, and the Leaf-picker in the home-field, and Mr. Stoat of Stoneheap, and Sir Squirrel of the Brake, and Reynard Slyboots, and Mr. Hopper the Hare, and Greedy Greylegs the Wolf, and Bare-breech the Bear-cub, and Mrs. Bruin, and Baron Bruin, and the Bridal train on the highway, and the Funeral train at the church, and Lady Moon in the Sky, and Lord Sun in heaven."</p>
			<hr/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
