<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Death of Chanticleer</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article data-parent="tales-from-the-fjeld" id="the-death-of-chanticleer" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h3 epub:type="title">The Death of Chanticleer</h3>
			<p>Once on a time there were a Cock and a Hen, who walked out into the field, and scratched, and scraped, and scrabbled. All at once, Chanticleer found a burr of hop, and Partlet found a barleycorn; and they said they would make malt and brew Yule ale.</p>
			<p>“Oh! I pluck barley, and I malt malt, and I brew ale, and the ale is good,” cackled dame Partlet.</p>
			<p>“Is the wort strong enough?” crew Chanticleer; and as he crowed he flew up on the edge of the cask, and tried to have a taste; but, just as he bent over to drink a drop, he took to flapping his wings, and so he fell head over heels into the cask, and was drowned.</p>
			<p>When dame Partlet saw that, she clean lost her wits, and flew up into the chimney-corner, and fell a-screaming and screeching out. “Harm in the house! harm in the house!” she screeched out all in a breath, and there was no stopping her.</p>
			<p>“What ails you, dame Partlet, that you sit there sobbing and sighing?” said the Handquern.</p>
			<p>“Why not?” said dame Partlet; “when goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the cask and drowned himself, and lies dead? That’s why I sigh and sob.”</p>
			<p>“Well, if I can do naught else, I will grind and groan,” said the Handquern; and so it fell to grinding as fast as it could.</p>
			<p>When the Chair heard that, it said⁠—</p>
			<p>“What ails you, Handquern, that you grind and groan so fast and oft?”</p>
			<p>“Why not, when goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the cask and drowned himself; and dame Partlet sits in the ingle, and sighs and sobs? That’s why I grind and groan,” said the Handquern.</p>
			<p>“If I can do naught else, I will crack,” said the Chair; and, with that, he fell to creaking and cracking.</p>
			<p>When the Door heard that, it said⁠—</p>
			<p>“What’s the matter? Why do you creak and crack so, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chair?”</p>
			<p>“Why not?” said the Chair; “goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the cask and drowned himself; dame Partlet sits in the ingle, sighing and sobbing; and the Handquern grinds and groans. That’s why I creak and crackle, and croak and crack.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” said the Door, “if I can do naught else, I can rattle and bang, and whistle and slam”; and, with that, it began to open and shut, and bang and slam, it deaved one to hear, and all one’s teeth chattered.</p>
			<p>All this the Stove heard, and it opened its mouth and called out⁠—</p>
			<p>“Door! Door! why all this slamming and banging?”</p>
			<p>“Why not?” said the Door; “when goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the cask and drowned himself; dame Partlet sits in the ingle, sighing and sobbing; the Handquern grinds and groans, and the Chair creaks and cracks. That’s why I bang and slam.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” said the Stove, “if I can do naught else, I can smoulder and smoke”; and so it fell a-smoking and steaming till the room was all in a cloud.</p>
			<p>The Axe saw this, as it stood outside, and peeped with its shaft through the window⁠—</p>
			<p>“What’s all this smoke about, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Stove?” said the Axe, in a sharp voice.</p>
			<p>“Why not?” said the Stove; “when goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the cask and drowned himself; dame Partlet sits in the ingle, sighing and sobbing; the Handquern grinds and groans; the Chair creaks and cracks, and the Door bangs and slams. That’s why I smoke and steam.”</p>
			<p>“Well, if I can do naught else, I can rive and rend,” said the Axe; and, with that, it fell to riving and rending all round about.</p>
			<p>This the Aspen stood by and saw.</p>
			<p>“Why do you rive and rend everything so, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Axe?” said the Aspen.</p>
			<p>“Goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the ale-cask and drowned himself,” said the Axe; “dame Partlet sits in the ingle, sighing and sobbing; the Handquern grinds and groans; the Chair creaks and cracks; the Door slams and bangs, and the Stove smokes and steams. That’s why I rive and rend all about.”</p>
			<p>“Well, if I can do naught else,” said the Aspen, “I can quiver and quake in all my leaves”; so it grew all of a quake.</p>
			<p>The Birds saw this, and twittered out⁠—</p>
			<p>“Why do you quiver and quake, Miss Aspen?”</p>
			<p>“Goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the ale-cask and drowned himself,” said the Aspen, with a trembling voice; “dame Partlet sits in the ingle, sighing and sobbing; the Handquern grinds and groans; the Chair creaks and cracks; the Door slams and bangs; the Stove steams and smokes; and the Axe rives and rends. That’s why I quiver and quake.”</p>
			<p>“Well, if we can do naught else, we will pluck off all our feathers,” said the Birds; and, with that, they fell a-pilling and plucking themselves till the room was full of feathers.</p>
			<p>This the Master stood by and saw, and, when the feathers flew about like fun, he asked the Birds⁠—</p>
			<p>“Why do you pluck off all your feathers, you Birds?”</p>
			<p>“Oh! goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the ale-cask and drowned himself,” twittered out the Birds; “dame Partlet sits sighing and sobbing in the ingle; the Handquern grinds and groans; the Chair creaks and cracks; the Door slams and bangs; the Stove smokes and steams; the Axe rives and rends, and the Aspen quivers and quakes. That’s why we are pilling and plucking all our feathers off.”</p>
			<p>“Well, if I can do nothing else, I can tear the brooms asunder,” said the man; and, with that, he fell tearing and tossing the brooms till the birch-twigs flew about east and west.</p>
			<p>The goody stood cooking porridge for supper, and saw all this.</p>
			<p>“Why, man!” she called out; “what are you tearing the brooms to bits for?”</p>
			<p>“Oh!” said the man, “goodman Chanticleer has fallen into the ale-vat and drowned himself; dame Partlet sits sighing and sobbing in the ingle; the Handquern grinds and groans; the Chair cracks and creaks; the Door slams and bangs; the Stove smokes and steams; the Axe rives and rends; the Aspen quivers and quakes; the Birds are pilling and plucking all their feathers off, and that’s why I am tearing the besoms to bits.”</p>
			<p>“So, so!” said the goody; “then I’ll dash the porridge over all the walls”; and she did it; for she took one spoonful after the other and dashed it against the walls, so that no one could see what they were made of for very porridge.</p>
			<p>That was how they drank the burial ale after goodman Chanticleer, who fell into the brewing-vat and was drowned; and, if you don’t believe it, you may set off thither and have a taste both of the ale and the porridge.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
