<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Lad and the Deil</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article data-parent="tales-from-the-norse" id="the-lad-and-the-deil" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h3 epub:type="title">The Lad and the Deil</h3>
			<p>Once on a time there was a lad who was walking along a road cracking nuts, so he found one that was worm-eaten, and just at that very moment he met the Deil.</p>
			<p>“Is it true, now,” said the lad, “what they say, that the Deil can make himself as small as he chooses, and thrust himself in through a pinhole?”</p>
			<p>“Yes it is,” said the Deil.</p>
			<p>“Oh! it is, is it? then let me see you do it, and just creep into this nut,” said the lad.</p>
			<p>So the Deil did it.</p>
			<p>Now, when he had crept well in through the worm’s hole, the lad stopped it up with a pin.</p>
			<p>“Now, I’ve got you safe,” he said, and put the nut into his pocket.</p>
			<p>So when he had walked on a bit, he came to a smithy, and he turned in and asked the smith if he’d be good enough to crack that nut for him.</p>
			<p>“Aye, that’ll be an easy job,” said the smith, and took his smallest hammer, laid the nut on the anvil, and gave it a blow, but it wouldn’t break.</p>
			<p>So he took another hammer a little bigger, but that wasn’t heavy enough either.</p>
			<p>Then he took one bigger still, but it was still the same story; and so the smith got wroth, and grasped his great sledgehammer.</p>
			<p>“Now, I’ll crack you to bits,” he said, and let drive at the nut with all his might and main. And so the nut flew to pieces with a bang that blew off half the roof of the smithy, and the whole house creaked and groaned as though it were ready to fall.</p>
			<p>“Why! if I don’t think the Deil must have been in that nut,” said the smith.</p>
			<p>“So he was; you’re quite right,” said the lad, as he went away laughing.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
