<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-fox-as-herdsman" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>THE FOX AS HERDSMAN</h2>
			<p>Once on a time there was a woman who went out to hire a herdsman, and she met a bear.</p>
			<p>“Whither away, Goody?” said Bruin.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I’m going out to hire a herdsman”, answered the woman.</p>
			<p>“Why not have me for a herdsman?” said Bruin.</p>
			<p>“Well, why not?” said the woman. “If you only knew how to call the flock; just let me hear?”</p>
			<p>“OW, OW!” growled the bear.</p>
			<p>“No, no! I won’t have you”, said the woman, as soon as she heard him say that, and off she went on her way.</p>
			<p>So, when she had gone a bit further, she met a wolf.</p>
			<p>“Whither away, Goody?” asked the Wolf.</p>
			<p>“Oh!” said she, “I’m going out to hire a herdsman.”</p>
			<p>“Why not have me for a herdsman?” said the Wolf.</p>
			<p>“Well, why not? if you can only call the flock; let me hear?” said she.</p>
			<p>“UH, UH!” said the Wolf.</p>
			<p>“No, no!” said the woman; “you’ll never do for me.”</p>
			<p>Well, after she had gone a while longer, she met a fox.</p>
			<p>“Whither away, Goody?” asked the Fox.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I’m just going out to hire a herdsman”, said the woman.</p>
			<p>“Why not have me for your herdsman?” asked the Fox.</p>
			<p>“Well, why not?” said she; “if you only knew how to call the flock; let me hear?”</p>
			<p>“DIL-DAL-HOLOM”, sung out the Fox, in such a fine clear voice.</p>
			<p>“Yes; I’ll have you for my herdsman”, said the woman; and so she set the Fox to herd her flock.</p>
			<p>The first day the Fox was herdsman he ate up all the woman’s goats; the next day he made an end of all her sheep; and the third day he ate up all her kine. So, when he came home at even, the woman asked what he had done with all her flocks?</p>
			<p>“Oh!” said the Fox, “their skulls are in the stream, and their bodies in the holt.”</p>
			<p>Now, the Goody stood and churned when the fox said this, but she thought she might as well step out and see after her flock; and while she was away the Fox crept into the churn and ate up the cream. So when the Goody came back and saw that, she fell into such a rage, that she snatched up the little morsel of the cream that was left, and threw it at the fox as he ran off, so that he got a dab of it on the end of his tail, and that’s the reason why the fox has a white tip to his brush.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
